# Evaluating Quantum Optimization for Dynamic

1

## Evaluating Quantum Optimization for Dynamic

## Self-Reliant Community Detection

#### David Bucher , Daniel Porawski , Benedikt Wimmer , Jonas N¨ußlein , Corey O’Meara , Naeimeh Mohseni ,

#### Giorgio Cortiana

#### and Claudia Linnhoff-Popien

Normalizing constant ***Abstract*****—Power grid partitioning is an important requirement* P *for resilient distribution grids. Since electricity production is pro-** One-hot constraint penalty factor *ρ*

### arXiv:2407.06773v2  [quant-ph]  16 Oct 2024

**gressively shifted to the distribution side, dynamic identification** Self-Reliance penalty parameter *λ *of self-reliant grid subsets becomes crucial for operation. This* e*rel Relative solution quality **problem can be represented as a modification to the well-known** Number of lines between two communities *B *NP-hard Community Detection (CD) problem. We formulate it as a Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) problem suitable for solving using quantum computation, which** I. INTRODUCTION **is expected to find better-quality partitions faster. The formu- lation aims to find communities with maximal self-sufficiency** The ever-growing integration of renewable electricity in **and minimal power flowing between them. To assess quantum** the grid causes a shift from a centrally planned operation **optimization for sizeable problems, we apply a hierarchical divisive method that solves sub-problem QUBOs to perform** of the electricity system to a decentralized, local one. This **grid bisections. Furthermore, we propose a customization of the** trend is expected to continue in the future to a state where **Louvain heuristic that includes self-reliance. In the evaluation,** potentially all electricity can be produced locally [1]. In such **we first demonstrate that this problem examines exponential** a future electricity grid, the planning periods are expected to be **runtime scaling classically. Then, using different IEEE power** considerably shorter since the production side is intermittent **system test cases, we benchmark the solution quality for multiple approaches: D-Wave’s hybrid quantum-classical solvers, classical** and large loads like charging Electric Vehicles (EV) or heat **heuristics, and a branch-and-bound solver. As a result, we** pumps are dynamically switched on and off. **observe that the hybrid solvers provide very promising results,** The separation of the grid into virtual microgrids aids anal- **both with and without the divisive algorithm, regarding solution** ysis and administrative tasks [2], and positively affects energy **quality achieved within a given time frame. Directly utilizing** balancing [3] as well as storage utilization [4]. Especially with **D-Wave’s Quantum Annealing (QA) hardware shows inferior partitioning.** growing decentral electricity production, logical clusters may help in incentivizing the prosumer behavior of individual cus- ***Index Terms*****—Grid Partitioning, Self-Reliance, Hierarchical** tomers because interaction does not happen between customers **Clustering, Hybrid Quantum Optimization, Quantum Annealing, QUBO.** and the grid operator but between customers within the same community [5]. This paper proposes an extension to the commonly known NOMENCLATURE combinatorial optimization problem for grid partitioning called Number of nodes in the grid *N* Community Detection (CD): The Self-Reliant Community Community structure: Partition of nodes *C* Detection (SRCD) problem finds self-sufficient virtual micro- Number of producers in the grid *NP* grids, i.e., partitions of the producers and consumers, where Number of possible communities *K* production and consumption are almost balanced. This is Adjacency matrix with absolute powerflow entries *A* achieved by including the momentary power flow in the Power flow on the line connecting *i* and *j wi,j* community detection formulation and adding a second self- Sum of absolute power flowing from and to node *i ki* reliance objective that aims to minimize the mismatch between Sum of total absolute power flow *m* production and consumption. The found community structure Power consumption/production at node *i pi* is not expected to be fixed for one network but is expected to Binary variable: 1 iff node *i* in comunity *ℓ*, else 0 *xi,ℓ* change over time with different consumption and production Modularity for *C Q*(*C*) data of the customers. E.g. community structure may shift Net power deviation *P*(*C*) when an EV is plugged in at one part of the grid while Self-reliant community energy *E*(*C*) it another one finished charging. The grid operator can use D. Bucher, D. Porawski, and B. Wimmer are with Aqarios such dynamic identification of the self-reliant partitions to GmbH, Prinzregentenstraße 120, 81677 Munich, Germany, e-mail: implement dynamic pricing zones or reward self-sufficient david.bucher@aqarios.com. customers with better tariffs. Alternatively, P2P markets can J. N¨ußlein and C. Linnhoff-Popien are with Ludwig-Maximilians University be established within the community, effectively reducing the Munich, Institute for Computer Science, Mobile and Distributed Systems Chair, e-mail: jonas.nuesslein@ifi.lmu.de. administrative overhead of matching consumer-producer pairs C. O’Meara, N. Mohseni, and G. Cortiana are with E.ON Digital in self-sustaining grids [6]. This comes with the benefit of Technology GmbH, Laatzener Str. 1, 30539 Hannover, Germany, e-mail: trading electricity, where it physically flows. *{*corey.o’meara, giorgio.cortiana*}*@eon.com.

2 CD based on modularity maximization is an NP-hard com- using solutions of smaller QUBO sub-problems. Similar meth- binatorial problem [7]. Solving CD classically is typically ods have already successfully been applied for solving related done with heuristics, like Girvan-Newman [8] or Louvains [9] problems [23], [27]. Finally, we benchmark the approaches on algorithm, leading to good approximate solutions. Yet, solving various test cases with IEEE power system test case topology. the problem to optimality requires potentially exponential As a classical baseline, we utilize the Louvain algorithm runtime, which we show in Sec. VI. Since SRCD has to that needs to be modified to include power flow modularity be optimized on a regular basis, fast and good solutions are and the self-reliance penalty, as well as Simulated Annealing desired. (SA) [28] and QBsolv [29] as a classical QUBO heuristics, In recent years, Quantum Computing (QC) has gained and Gurobi [30] as a classical branch-and-bound solver. Ad- attention since the ever-improving hardware now allows for the ditionally, we utilize D-Wave’s hybrid cloud solvers and their first proof-of-concept applications [10]. Quantum optimization quantum annealing computer as hybrid and quantum methods. is one of the prominent application areas of QC, where it The results obtained directly from D-Wave’s processor are is able to efficiently find solution of NP-hard combinatorila considerably worse than all other solving strategies, despite optimization problems faster than classical algorithms. Solving successful hyperparameter tuning. This is due the the noise SRCD with quantum optimization can lead to identifying a being persistent in today’s unmatured hardware. The modified new quantum utility use case, i.e., an optimization problem Louvain algorithm, along with the proprietary hybrid solvers where quantum optimization techniques deliver good quality from D-Wave, performs best with respect to relative solution solutions practically faster or equally as fast as classical quality achieved within a given time window. algorithms. The main contributions of this paper are as follows: The expectation of QC to speed up optimization tasks stems
1. The novel formulation of the SRCD problem including

from the inherent quantum mechanical properties, superposi- its QUBO-formulation. tion, entanglement, and an exponentially growing state space.
1. Customization of the Louvain algorithm and the imple-

Grover’s algorithm [11] is one of the first quantum algorithms mentation of the divisive method for solving the SRCD. that exhibits a scaling advantage compared to classical search
1. Extensive benchmarking and evaluation on different test

algorithms. Although equipped with a mathematically proven cases to demonstrate the competitiveness of quantum speedup, the practical use of Grover is still not possible approaches. due to the Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum (NISQ) state The remainder of the letter is structured as follows: We of current days hardware and the relatively deep circuits overview related work on graph partitioning and quantum involved [12]. Instead, short, variational circuits, like the annealing applications in Sec. II. Afterwards, we introduce Quantum Approximate Optimization Ansatz (QAOA) [13], Quantum Annealing and discuss the classical and hybrid meth- [14] or the Variational Quantum Eigensolver (VQE), are ods used in Sec. III. Then, we present our new mathematical the focus of current-day research on quantum optimization formulation of the SRCD model in Sec. IV, followed by the applications, with the hope of tapping into quantum utility problem-specific solution concepts in Sec. V. The subsequent soon. Besides optimization algorithms on universal quantum Sec. VI explains the methodology employed for evaluating the computers, purpose-built Quantum Annealing (QA) devices performance of the solvers, and Sec. VII presents the results of for optimization have emerged [15], [16]. They rely on the the benchmarks. Finally, we conclude our findings in Sec. VIII. adiabatic principle of quantum mechanics that states if the evolution of a system happens slowly enough, the system II. RELATED WORK stays in the ground state of the momentary Hamiltonian [15], *A. Grid Partitioning* [17]. In that sense, a QA device is initialized with an easily preparable ground state. Subsequently, the system undergoes Operating power grids is a challenging and complex task a gradual transition to a Hamiltonian, where the ground state that becomes increasingly complicated when integrating in- of the system encodes the solution to a specific optimization termittent renewable energy resources. Grid partitioning has problem. Currently, available QA hardware is provided by emerged as a potential tool to overcome these issues and the company D-Wave and features the usage of quadratically facilitate operation, control, and management [31]. Physical interacting Ising problem Hamiltonians [18]. This problem partitions can help in making the system more resilient [32] specification is isomorphic to the Quadratic Unconstrained and efficient by eliminating cascading effects [33], loop flows, Binary Optimization (QUBO) problem, in which many NP- and unnecessary losses [34]. Furthermore, separation can complete and NP-hard problems can be formulated [19]. The minimize costs as the number of new lines to be constructed application of QA in various domain-specific application tasks can be reduced [1]. has been widely explored in literature [1], [5], [6], [20]–[22]. Grid partitioning based on operational experience or admin- CD has also been studied using QA ans¨atze [23]–[26]. istrative regions is limited due to the inaccurate representation Since the goal of the work is to demonstrate the current of the underlying structure [31]. As a result, algorithmic performance of QA and QA-enhanced techniques, we formu- methods have emerged as more effective alternatives [34]. late the SRCD as a QUBO. However, since current hardware Graph theoretic ans¨atze based on hierarchical spectral clus- does not allow for solving large QUBO instances because tering have been explored, featuring grid-specific properties of restricted connectivity, we employ a hierarchical divisive like admittance and average power flow [35]. Furthermore, hybrid quantum algorithm that recursively splits the network Ref. [2] explores partitioning through k-means clustering using

3 basis configurations *|ψ⟩*= *α |*0*⟩*+ *β |*1*⟩*, with *|α|*2 + *|β|*2 = 1. an electrical distance, paying attention to cluster size and Combining *n* qubits together allows for encoding all 2*n* bit count. Besides the mentioned methods, grid partitioning through configurations in the quantum state, i.e., CD has been widely explored in literature [8], [36], [37]. 2*n−*1 X CD can be approximately solved using the methods from (1) *|ψ⟩*= *ψx |x⟩,* before (k-means and spectral clustering) [37], [38] or with *x*=0 heuristic algorithms (Girvan-Newman [8], Louvain [9]). More- where *x ∈{*0*,* 1*}n*. Measuring the quantum state in the over, genetic algorithms have been identified as encouraging computational basis reveals the bit string *x* with probability solution strategies for modularity-based grid partitioning [36]. *|ψx|*2 [42]. Thus, the goal of quantum optimization lies in However, since modularity solely considers the topology of the preparing a quantum state with a high probability of mea- underlying grid and leaves out its functioning, adaptations of suring the optimal bit configuration regarding a combinatorial the modularity have been made to identify so-called functional optimization problem. community structures based on Electrical Coupling Strength Utilizing the Pauli *z*-matrix ˆ*σz i* = *|*0*⟩⟨*0*| −|*1*⟩⟨*1*|* acting on (ECS) [31], [39]. The CD methods listed here are entirely qubit *i*, one can define an Ising Hamiltonian (cost operator) static, in opposition to SRCD, which is a dynamic approach X X that includes the momentary power draw and infeed of the ˆ*HC* = *− Ji,j*ˆ*σz i ⊗*ˆ*σz j − hi*ˆ*σz* (2) *i ,* customers in the power grid. The idea of self-reliance is not *i,j i* directly applicable to the static CD approaches. where the tensor product of the Pauli operator refers to the operator acting on qubits *i* and *j* simultaneously. The Ising *B. Applications of Quantum Optimization* Hamiltonian is diagonal in the *z*-basis. Therefore, its ground Quantum optimization has been applied to many industry- state is a computational basis state, meaning a bit string, now relevant topics of different domains by transforming known referred to as *x∗*. The energy (or cost) of a bit string can also optimization problems into QUBO [19]. Application areas be described entirely classically, i.e., *⟨x|* ˆ*HC |x⟩*= *HC*(*x*), include logistics, where QA has been successfully employed where *HC* is of QUBO form to solve the capacitated vehicle routing problem [20], which X X X is an extension of the renowned traveling salesman problem. *HC*(*x*) = *− Ji,jzizj − hizi* = *Qi,jxixj,* (3) In finance, QA has been used to optimize the composition of *i,j i i,j* a portfolio of assets using Markovitzian portfolio theory [21], with *zi* = 1 *−*2*xi*, or ˆ*σz i |xi⟩*= *zi |xi⟩*. Therefore, once it which maps naturally into QUBO form. Electricity domain use is possible to encode a combinatorial problem as QUBO, one cases include the application of QAOA to solve the prosumer can implement the Ising Hamiltonian physically and solve the problem, i.e., efficiently scheduling loads given a dynamic problem with the following method [19]. tariff to minimize overall costs of consumers [14], or a hybrid The adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics states that QA approach to schedule tariff discounts in order to achieve if a system starts in the ground state of a Hamiltonian and demand side response and improve utilization of renewable that Hamiltonian begins to vary slowly, it remains in the electricity [22]. ground state of the momentary Hamiltonian [15], [17]. As a Grid partitioning with different objectives has also success- consequence, Adiabatic Quantum Computing (AQC) begins in the equal superposition state *|*+*⟩*= 2*−n/*2 P fully been achieved with QA: Ref. [5] explore the application *x |x⟩*, the ground of QA to community detection on IEEE grid topologies with state of ˆ*HD* = *−*P *i* ˆ*σx i* , and undergoes the time evolution of ECS in the modularity, like Ref. [31] introduced. Ref. [40] the following Hamiltonian investigates grid partitioning based on the Laplacian matrix in ˆ*H*(*s*) = *s* ˆ*HC* + (1 *−s*) ˆ*HD,* the system. To formulate the inequality constraint containing (4) problem as QUBO they introduce approximate integer slack with *s ∈*[0*,* 1]. When the transition from *s* = 0 to *s* = 1 variables and observe faster runtime of the QA-based method. happens slowly enough, the state will transition to the ground Both of the grid partitioning methods are static as opposed state of ˆ*HC*, i.e., *|x∗⟩*, which is the solution to the QUBO to our dynamic approach. Ref. [1] explore hybrid QA grid encoded in ˆ*HC*. partitioning with the goal of minimizing the cost for con- Due to decoherence and other noise artifacts, the transi- structing microgrids while enabling electricity sharing [41]. tion between the two Hamiltonians can never happen slowly For that they formulate the problem as QUBO with integer enough in reality. Therefore, one has to decrease the transition slack variables likewise to the method proposed in Ref. [40]. time, leaving the AQC regime of the process and entering However, even though they include self-reliance constraint, it Quantum Annealing (QA) [16]. Nevertheless, the probability is terms of electricity surplus throughout one year of entire of measuring the optimal bit string *|ψx∗|*2 normally does not regions. Therefore, their formulation is not directly applicable vanish. So, repeatedly sampling from the resulting probability to our intended goals. distribution may eventually reveal the optimal solution. D-Wave’s current QA hardware, or Quantum Processing III. BACKGROUND Unit (QPU), the Advantage System1 offers well above 5000 *A. Quantum Annealing* qubits and more than 35000 couplers [18]. The qubits are In quantum mechanics, the elementary unit of information, a quantum bit (or qubit), can be in the superposition of both 1In our case, Advantage 5.4, located in Germany.

4 arranged in the so-called Pegasus topology, connecting every on a graph with edge weights resembling the physical power qubit to 15 other qubits. The fixed topology poses a practical flow. We include the second property through a self-reliance caveat when the QUBO connectivity is larger than 15 because penalty term in the optimization objective. Lastly, the problem multiple physical qubits must be tied together to form a logical must be translated into a QUBO for quantum optimization. qubit (called *chain*) with higher connectivity. This reduces the Fig. 1 shows an exemplary instance of the SRCD problem size of a fully connected QUBO that can be solved using the and its desired solution. Advantage QPU to only 177 binary variables. *A. Preprocessing B. Classical and Hybrid Methods* First of all, we need to compute the physical power flow for To solve optimization problems classically (or hybrid), we the given consumption and production data of the nodes *pi*. will utilize the following methods throughout the paper: To this end, we perform a linearized power flow computation Gurobi [30] is one of the most advanced Mixed-Integer- using the python package pandapower [44]. Despite linear Programming (MIP) solvers commercially available. At its DC power flow not being the ideal choice for distribution-style core, it is a branch-and-bound optimizer that features a wide power grids, we still utilize it due to its simplicity. The core variety of constraints and quadratic objective functions. focus of this paper is the performance of QC techniques on SA [28] is a Monte Carlo (MC) method for solving QUBO this kind of problem and not the most realistic power flow problems. In each MC sweep, SA proposes bit flips in its values. The power flow computation can be replaced by more current solution and accepts them according to the energy of advanced methods without issues. the configuration and an ever-decreasing temperature. Thus, As a result of the DC power flow, we get the power flowing SA gradually transitions from exploring the solution space to over the line connecting *i* with *j* as *wi,j ∈*R. We, therefore, exploiting a (local) minimum. construct a graph with the edge weights being the absolute QBsolv [29] is a hybrid solution strategy initially created power flow over the respective line, described by the adjacency for solving large instances with QA. It creates and solves sub- matrix problem QUBOs by fixing certain bits in the problem and ( if (*i, j*) *∈E |wi,j|* only optimizes for those with the largest energy impact. In (5) *Ai,j* = else*.* conjunction, a classical Tabu search [43] is performed on the 0 complete problem. Both solvers are wrapped in an outer loop. As a sub-problem solver, we utilize SA in our experiments to *B. Modularity* remain entirely classical. QBsolv with SA will be called QSA Modularity is a measure of the community structure of in the rest of the text. a graph partition. High modularity means the community D-Wave’s Leap Cloud platform offers proprietary hybrid structure given by *C* matches the intrinsic partitions of the quantum-classical solvers that harness both the power of their graph well. The modularity can take values between [*−*1*/*2*,* 1] QA hardware as well as classical computational power. Since and is defined as follows [45]: the QPU devices are too small (or too sparsely connected) ( ) for direct execution of large problems, they internally perform X X 1 *Ai,j −kikj Q*(*C*) = *,* (6) decomposition to map problems onto the hardware. The Binary 2*m* 2*m* Quadratic Model (BQM) solver (called *Leap BQM*) is capable *C∈C i,j∈C* where *ki* = P P of solving QUBOs while the Constrained Quadratic Model *j Ai,j* and *m* = 1 *i ki*. Consequently, finding 2 (CQM) solver (called *Leap CQM*) can handle constraints and a arg max*C Q*(*C*) that maximizes the modularity will uncover integer/real variables. grid partitions. Hence, this is the main objective of our opti- mization problem. Powerflow modularity, i.e. using the actual IV. MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION power flow as the connection strength within the grid topology from Eq. (5), helps identify self-reliant communities. Little Given a power grid as a graph *G*(*V, E*) with *|V |* = *N*, we power is flowing between approximately self-reliant network want to find a mutually exclusive community structure *C* = partitions as all of the produced electricity is consumed within. *{C*1*, . . . , CK}*, with *Ci ⊆{*1*, . . . , N}*, *Ci ∩Cj* = *∅∀i̸* = *j*, and S *i Ci* = *{*1*, . . . , N}*. Each node represents a consumer or producer in the grid with *pi* being its momentary load, *C. Self-Reliance* if positive, and production, if negative. The production and As the second part, we want to make sure that the power consumption data are considered pre-existing for the graph produced within a community also gets consumed within it. partitioning problem and will not be varied throughout the This condition is most likely not exactly enforceable, but only optimization. The community structure *C* should be optimized approximately, i.e., P *i∈Cj pi ≈*0 *∀j*, as we cannot control the such that most of the electricity is flowing within nodes of the loads *pi* in our setting. We can quantify the squared *net power* same partition, and the total generation within the community *deviation* from zero for all communities combined as follows closely matches the total consumption. Therefore, in this X !2 section, we construct a self-reliant version of the modularity- X *P*(*C*) = 1 based CD, the so-called Self-Reliant Community Detection (7) *pi , P* (SRCD). We account for the first property by executing CD *C∈C i∈C*

5

| xi | Self-Reliant Community Detection one-hot encoded binary variables, e.g. = = (0, 0, 1, 0, 0, | s 0) |
| --- | --- | --- |

|  | 2 [kWh] 1 production 0 / consumption −1 −2 |
| --- | --- |
|  |  |
|  |  |
|  |  |
|  |  |
|  |  |

self-reliance P *pi ≈*0 Fig. 1. Examplatory instance of a power grid with producers and consumers (case39). Negative values refer to production, and positive values refer to consumption. The line thickness indicates the absolute power flowing through that line. The community of each node is described through the one-hot encoding of *K* binary variables. The net consumption within a community is aimed to be minimized to guarantee self-reliance. with *P* = P *i p*2 *i* being a normalization constant that helps with us tune the strength of the self-reliance penalty. In Sec. VI, combining the objective with the modularity. Minimizing *P*(*C*) we will discuss how we set *λ* in our experiments. finds customer groupings with minimal net power deviation. Using the binary variables and the one-hot encoding we subsequently get P *i∈Cℓpi* = P*N* Instead of the absolute power deviation, the squared power *i*=1 *xiℓpi*. Therefore, together deviation can be naturally mapped onto a QUBO problem, as with Eq. (8), we can formulate Eq. (10) into a QUBO problem, the next section shows. with *X* = *{*0*,* 1*}N×K*: " ( ) X X *−*1 *Ai,j −kikj D. QUBO Formulation* min *xi,ℓxj,ℓ* 2*m* 2*m x∈X* To eventually formulate the problem as QUBO, we must *i,j ℓ* X !2 !2 # represent the community structure *C* through binary variables. X X X + *λ* To this end, we must first restrict ourselves to a maximum (11) *pixi,ℓ* + *ρ* 1 *− xi,ℓ , P* of *K* possible communities. Then, we use one-hot encoding: *ℓ i i ℓ* Each node is associated with *K* bits, of which only a single where the *ρ* term is the penalty from Eq. (9) that enforces one is set to 1, indicating the community index the node has the one-hot constraint. The penalty factor *ρ >* 0 has to be been assigned to. An example of one-hot encoding can be chosen very large for the solution to be valid. When solving seen in Fig. 1. The total number of bits is *N × K*. Using the the problem with MIP solvers (such as Gurobi or Leap CQM), notation *xi,ℓ∈{*0*,* 1*}*, i.e. *xi,ℓ*= 1 indicates node *i* belongs one can directly specify the constraint Eq. (9) without adding to community *ℓ*, we formulate the following identity the penalty term.  if *i* and *j* belong to  1  X *K E. Consumption Bias* the same community (8) *xi,ℓxj,ℓ*=  In real data P  *i pi̸* = 0, i.e., there is not equally as much *ℓ*=1 0 otherwise. power generated in the overall grid as consumed. Thus, one Additionally, the one-hot encoding has to be enforced by can include *K′ < K* communities that are excluded from the making sure the following condition is satisfied self-reliance penalty (7). For example, if most of the nodes *K* !2 consume electricity, only a few self-sustaining microgrids can X *K* X X (9) *xi,ℓ*= 1 *∀i ⇐⇒* min *xi,ℓ−*1 *.* be found. The remaining customers are gathered in the *K′ x* non-self-reliant microgrids that consume all their power from *ℓ*=1 *i ℓ*=1 The right-hand expression of the equivalence is the penalty an external grid. In the upcoming experiments, we will only consider completely self-reliant test cases. term required for QUBO [19]. The number of communities *K* is generally unknown, but a too-large *K* is not an issue because these bits do not have V. CUSTOM OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHMS to be assigned. A problem only arises if *K* is chosen to be In this section, we present two problem-specific methods for smaller than the real optimal number of communities. In our solving the SRCD problem. One is a derivative of the well- experiments, we utilize a heuristic approach to determining a known Louvain algorithm for CD, a classical heuristic that good value of *K*, which is described in Sec. VI-C. agglomoratively identifies communities. Second, we propose a Combining community detection (6) with the self-reliance divisive method that iteratively splits the grid into smaller sub- penalty (7), we arrive at the following minimization objective grids until no further improvement is achievable. The splitting problem has QUBO form and can, therefore, be solved by all *C∗*= arg min (10) [*−Q*(*C*) + *λP*(*C*)] *,* QUBO solvers mentioned before, including QA. This makes *C* i.e., maximizing modularity while minimizing deviations from the divisive algorithm effectively a hybrid quantum-classical the self-reliance condition. Here, *λ >* 0 is a parameter that lets method for solving SRCD.

6 *A. Louvain algorithm* The complete Louvain method encloses the procedure de- scribed to this point with an outer loop that coarse grains the Several greedy heuristics for solving the graph partitioning graph after each step, i.e. merging all found communities in a problem based on modularity maximization exist [9], [46], single node. Then, the procedure described above is repeated [47]. One of the most widely used algorithms is called the on the coarse-grained graph, and the outer loop terminates if *Louvain*-method [9]. It works by agglomeratively merging modularity gain can no longer be achieved. For more detail, communities in order to find an optimal community structure. see Ref. [9]. In contrast to the QUBO (11), the algorithm does not require the total number of communities predetermined. In the fol- lowing, we develop an adaptation to Louvain that includes the *B. Divisive Algorithm* self-reliance condition in its formulation. The ordinary CD problem has already been solved by using Initially, Louvain starts with all nodes in the network a recursive bipartition strategy [23]. Additionally, divisive assigned to their own communities. It picks a node at random methods have successfully solved Coalition Structures Gen- and computes the modularity differences ∆*Q* for moving the eration (CSG) problems in induced subgraph games through selected node into the communities of all of its neighbors. the GCS-Q algorithm [27], [48]. Therefore, inspired by these The move with the largest modularity gain will be picked and methods, we derive the optimal splitting sub-problem QUBO executed. Afterwards, a new node is selected and the procedure for SRCD in the following, starting from the full problem is repeated until no positive modularity gain is achievable formulation in Eq. (11). The divisive algorithm works by anymore. Instead of computing the difference by computing recursively finding bipartite splits and dividing the problem the entire modularity, ∆*Q* can be directly computed, making into multiple sub-problems. In contrast to Louvain, it begins Louvain very efficient. The modularity difference of moving with all nodes in the same community and terminates when node *i* out of community *D* and into community *C* can be no further split can improve the solution quality. Performing computed as follows only bipartite splits lets us drop the one-hot-encoding con- straint and represent the community assignment by a single (12) ∆*Q*(*D →i →C*) = ∆*Q*(*D →i*) + ∆*Q*(*i →C*) binary variable: *yi* = 0 indicates node *i* belongs to the first with, moving *i* into community *C* being expressed as community and *yi* = 1 means it belongs to the second one for " )2# the particular sub-problem being solved. With respect to the (*k*tot *k*in *C* + 2*ki,C C* + *ki* formulation of the single-problem approach (11), the QUBO ∆*Q*(*i →C*) = *−* 2*m* 2*m* problem for a sub-problem can be formulated as follows: " )2# (*k*tot )2 ( *ki* Let *S* be the set of nodes in the sub-problem to solve, *k*in *m −kik*tot = *ki,C* with *Y* = *{*0*,* 1*}|S|* and *S ⊆{*1*, . . . , N}*. We can utilize *−* 2*m − C C − C* (13) 2*m*2 *.* 2*m* 2*m δyi,yj* = 2*yiyj −yi −yj* + 1 as the Kronecker delta of two Here, *ki,C* = P categories. Hence, the QUBO formulation for the sub-problem *j∈C Ai,j* are all the edge weights between *C C* = P reads and *i*, *k*in *i,j∈C Ai,j* the edge weights within *C* and *k*tot *C* = " P ( ) *i∈C ki* all the edge weights of the community members. X *−*1 *Ai,j −kikj* min *δyi,yj* The expression for the opposite move ∆*Q*(*D →i*) works 2*m* 2*m y∈Y* similarly [9]. *i,j* X !2 X !2 # We need to include another term into the modularity differ- + *λ* + *λ* (17) *piyi pi*(1 *−yi*) *,* ence that accounts for the self-reliance condition: *P P i i* ∆*P*(*i →C*) effectively reducing the size of the QUBO matrix of the first       2 2 bipartite split by the factor of *K* compared to the single- X X = 1   *pi* +   *−p*2 problem QUBO. Furthermore, each subsequent problem is *pj − pj* (14) *i P* roughly half the size of the problem from which it was derived. *j∈C j∈C* Note that QUBO (17) is equivalent to the Min-Cut QUBO X = 2*pi* (15) found in GCS-Q [27]. *pj. P* Small sub-problem QUBOs can often be solved reliably and *j∈C* P fast using classical methods. We, therefore, extend Refs. [23], Likewise, ∆*P*(*D →i*) = *−*2*pi j∈D,i̸*=*j pj*. [27] by employing a cut-off size for which problems smaller *P* The central quantity of the Louvain method can then be than the size will be solved classically. This will alleviate any adapted as follows fine branching towards the end, which would lead to many QPU calls. Furthermore, since the SRCD sub-problem QUBOs ∆˜*Q*(*D →i →C*) = ∆*Q*(*D →i →C*)   are fully connected, we employ fast Clique embedding [49] X X as the strategy to map the problem to the D-Wave hardware *−λ*2*pi* *. pj − pk* (16) graph, effectively reducing wall clock times. *P j∈C k∈D,k̸*=*i* Notably, the divisive approach is greedy, and a perfect split All remaining parts of the algorithm do not need to be found for each sub-problem does not guarantee the best overall modified. solution.

7 TABLE I and cloud computing (and the hybrid machine runs unknown OVERVIEW OF THE TEST CASE SETTINGS specifications), we can compare the scaling behavior in terms of solution quality regarding different instance sizes4. *NP K* The runtime is measured as the time it takes for the solver to

| case39 case57 case89pegase case118 case145 case illinois200 case300 case1354pegase case1888rte | 20 20 19 19 18 28 29 29 29 28 45 45 43 43 43 58 58 58 58 60 76 73 73 75 74 98 100 99 99 100 148 147 149 153 147 676 678 678 675 683 942 949 939 939 941 | 9 6 9 7 6 10 10 9 8 10 10 11 10 9 10 14 11 11 9 11 9 10 10 8 12 14 15 17 18 15 20 18 19 17 19 – – – – – – – – – – |
| --- | --- | --- |

produce a result; no model construction times are considered. Therefore, in the divisive approach, the sum of all sub-problem runtimes equals the overall runtime. The time for model creation can be further optimized and accelerated, so it is not included. The parameters for the QUBO heuristics, SA and QSA, are set to 1000 Monte Carlo sweeps, and the sampling process is repeated until the specified timeout has been reached. The following benchmark protocol is used to compare the VI. EVALUATION METHODS results. For each case and instance, the optimization is repeated *A. Power Grid Test Cases* five times with different initial seeds for each solver. To To evaluate the performance of the various solving strate- compare the quality of a community structure *Cc,i,s,r* found by gies, we require test cases of the future residential power solver *s* for case *c*, instance *i*, and repetition *r*, we calculate grid, meaning many decentralized electricity sources. Since the the solution energy (called SRCD energy) akin to the objective main focus of this work lies in the performance benchmarks of function (10), i.e., modularity minus self-reliance violation: the quantum algorithms, entirely accurate real-world instances (18) *E*(*C*) = *Q*(*C*) *−λP*(*C*)*.* are not required. Following the steps presented here, we generate real-world inspired test cases with equal production As a consequence, a higher SRCD energy is better. and consumption volume. Since we do not have access to the optimal solution of
1. Choose a real-world power IEEE system test case pro-

a case and instance, we need to make the solution energy vided by pandapower2 as a basis for the grid topology. comparable between instances. Therefore, we employ the best-
1. Rescale the network, such that the smallest power line

found solution energy per instance as the reference point for is 50 m in length. the other solutions: . ( )
1. Replace all lines with residential power lines (NAYY

*e*rel (19) 4x50 SE) and set the voltage level in the entire grid to *c,i,s,r* = *E*(*Cc,i,s,r*) max *s′,r′ E*(*Cc,i,s′,r′*) *.* 400 V. Replace transformators with power lines. A relative solution quality *e*rel close to 1 means a very good
1. Randomly place producers and consumers on the busses

solution in comparison to all other solutions found. It should of the network. be noted that *e*rel may be negative if the modularity value of
1. Sample production and consumption data from shifted

normal distributions: *pi ∼N*(*µ* = *±*1kW*, σ* = 0*.*5kW). the solution is low and self-reliance is violated.
1. Ensure P

*i pi* = 0 through scaling of production data. To quantify self-sufficiency, we compute the average self-
1. Run power flow calculation, as described in Sec. IV-A.

reliance violation, defined as follows ||P || For our experiments, we choose the available IEEE test cases X 1 *i∈C pi* P (20) *i∈C |pi| .* between 39 nodes and 1888 nodes and generate five instances *|C|* based on different seeds. Table I lists the number of producers *C∈C* for each instance and case considered3. Fig. 1 shows case39 Similar to Ref. [31], we define the Boundary Powerflow Factor (BPFF) as the normalized average power flow running between as an example of a preprocessed power grid with indicated communities power flow. X BPFF = 1 *Ai,j* (21) (1 *−δci,cj*)*, B. Parameters and Metrics B* max*e∈E Ae* (*i,j*)*∈E* We chose *λ* = 0*.*1 as the self-reliance penalty based on where *B* is the number of lines between two communities and preliminary experiments across various grid topologies. This (1*−δci,cj*) indicates whether line (*i, j*) connects two different value ensures that communities maintain satisfactory self- communities. sufficiency while also remaining intact. Too large self-reliance penalties would force communities to be ripped apart. *C. SRCD Experiments* The only control parameter for the Leap cloud-based solvers *1) Single-Problem:* The single-problem approach from is the runtime. Therefore, we restrict the runtime of all solvers Eq. (11) has to be viewed separately from the divisive ap- per instance to the minimum required runtime of the Leap proach, as we can only set the timeout on a solver call level. solver. Although the runtime is not comparable between local We benchmark test cases up to 300 nodes with Gurobi, Leap CQM, SA, QSA, and Louvain. 2https://pandapower.readthedocs.io/en/v2.0.1/networks/power system test cases.html 3Additional naming for test cases is shortened in the following: E.g., 4Local classical optimizations are run on an Intel i7-1165G7 CPU @ case89pegase is called case89. 2.80GHz, 16.0 GB RAM.

8 Since the minimum runtime Leap requires for solving Without self-reliance With self-reliance case300 (6 s) only differs slightly from the overall minimum Fit: 1*.*13*N* Fit: 1*.*42*N* runtime of the Leap CQM solver, being 5 s, we set all solver 40 timeouts for our experiments concerning the single-problem approach to 6 s. 100 30 TTS [min] One major drawback of the single-problem approach is 10*−*2 that *K*—the number of communities—has to be known before- 20 hand for the optimization, in contrast to the Louvain heuristic 20 30 40 10 or the divisive approach. Therefore, before the optimization, we run the Louvain algorithm 100 times and pick the median 0 number of communities found as *K*. A too-large *K* is mathe- 15 20 25 30 35 40 matically not a problem since communities can be kept empty. Number of nodes *N* However, it increases complexity and, therefore, reduces so- lution quality. This has also been confirmed by preliminary Fig. 2. Gurobi time to solution (TTS) for five instances. A clear exponential growth in the required runtime is apparent. Results with self-reliance turned experiments, where the presented strategy delivered the best on and off are both shown. Evidently, self-reliance makes the problem much results. The number of communities *K* for each instance can harder. The fitted curves highlight the exponential behavior. be observed in Table I. Accordingly, the number of binary variables (*N × K*) ranges from 234 in the smallest instance PFM+SR PFM default to 6000 in the largest. *2) Divisive Algorithm Evaluation:* Results for the divisive Avg. Self-Reliance Violation 0*.*4 0*.*4 approach are gathered with Gurobi, Leap BQM, SA, QSA, and D-Wave’s Advantage 5.4 system (DW) on the cases (case39– 0*.*3 0*.*3 case300). Here, the number of binary variables in the largest BPFF sub-problem equals the number of nodes in the network. 0*.*2 0*.*2 Sub-problems with *≤*20 nodes are solved with Gurobi. The minimum time limit of Leap BQM is 3 s and gradually 0*.*1 0*.*1 increases for problems larger than 1000 binary variables. The same timeout is set for the other solvers. Unlike the case39 case57 case118 case39 case57 case118 single-problem approach, the timeout is only set for the sub- problems. Consequently, two solvers may take different times Fig. 3. BPFF and avg. self-reliance violation of different CD methods for to solve the SRCD problem because they solve a different three power networks. Default refers to CD on just the network topology. number of sub-problems. PFM+SR and PFM label our formulation with and without the self-reliance penalty. Clearly, our method reduces power flow between communities and *3) First Split Evaluation:* The number of sub-problems results in the most self-reliant communities. solved in the divisive approach grows with the number of identifiable communities in the network (*≈*2*K*) and, there- *A. Verification of the mathematical formulation* fore, with the grid size. However, with each iteration, the problem size shrinks by, most likely, one-half. The remaining To verify that our formulation of the mathematical model sub-problems then have the same structure. To isolate the also delivers on the intended goals, namely reducing power performance of the solvers in the divisive approach, we focus flow between communities and finding almost self-sufficient on the first sub-problem of a network, i.e., the first split. Doing communities, we test the performance regarding the BPFF and so allows us to investigate the performance of larger problems avg. self-reliance violation in Fig. 3. The results were obtained since the growing number of sub-problems does not need to with the modified Louvain algorithm on ten instances of three be considered. power system test cases and show three different methods: our method with (*λ* = 0*.*1) and without the self-reliance penalty, and CD on just the network topology. It is apparent that VII. RESULTS our method with self-reliance penalty performs best in both We will first discuss the results of the two approaches metrics and, therefore, fulfills the intended purpose. separately due to different runtime settings. Nevertheless, in Sec. VII-D, we will still qualitatively compare the solutions *B. Single-Problem Results* yielded by both methods. Fig. 4 shows the relative solution quality (19) of the five *On Classical Hardness:* Before we delve into the bench- investigated solvers on seven IEEE power system test cases. marks, we briefly investigate the classical hardness of the Each box corresponds to 25 data points, consisting of five runs considered problem in Fig. 2. Here, Gurobi solves the SRCD (with and without the self-reliance in use) until proven opti- on each of the five instances per case. mality, unlike the benchmark runs. The problem exhibits an As apparent, the classical community detection heuristic exponential scaling behavior with the number of nodes in the Louvain and the cloud-based hybrid quantum solver Leap network. With self-reliance in place, the scaling is even worse CQM produce the best results. A closer comparison can be than plain community detection. seen in Fig. 8 when we compare it to Leap’s performance in

9

| 1.0 0.8 Gurobi Leap Quality 0.6 SA Louvain QSA 0.4 Solution 0.2 0.0 −0.2 c a se 3 9 c a se 5 7 c a se 8 9 c a se 1 1 8 c a se 1 4 5 c a se 2 0 0 c a se 3 0 0 |  |  | Leap Lou | vain |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | G S Q | urobi A SA |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

|  | Gurobi SA |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  | Leap DW |  |  |  |  |

1*.*0 Solution Quality 0*.*9 0*.*8 0*.*7 0*.*6 case39 case57 case89 case118 case145 case200 case300 Fig. 5. Solution qualities of the solvers in the divisive approach with 3 s time limit per sub-problem; all solvers, except for DW, produce good results. DW only really delivers comparable results for the smallest case39 and performs more poorly as the size increases.

| 1.000 0.975 0.950 Quality 0.925 Solution 0.900 Gurobi 0.875 SA QSA 0.850 Leap c a se 1 4 5 c a se 2 0 0 c a se 3 0 0 c a se 1 3 5 4 c a se 1 8 8 8 |  | urobi SA ap |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | G SA Q Le |  |  |  |  |

Fig. 4. Solution qualities of the different solvers in the single-problem approach with 6 s time limit. SA performs by far worst, followed by Gurobi, which produces solutions with acceptable quality for cases smaller than case200. However, in the larger cases, Gurobi fails to complete its prepro- cessing within the given time limit. QSA outperforms Gurobi but gradually decreases the larger the problem gets. Nevertheless, Leap and Louvain produce the best solutions; for a more detailed comparison see Fig. 8. the divisive approach. The QUBO heuristic, QSA, performs well in the smaller cases but continuously loses solution quality as the problems become larger. The classical branch- and-bound solver, Gurobi, is initially up to a similar course as QSA, but the solution quality suddenly diminishes to *e*rel = 0 between case145 and case200. This is due to Gurobi not Fig. 6. Solution qualities of the solvers in the first split of the divisive finishing its preprocessing, consisting of solving a continuous approach on larger problem instances. The performance tendencies indicated relaxation of the original problem. Therefore, the branch-and- by the complete divisive run shown in Fig. 5 are only accentuated here. Leap bound algorithm has not even started, and the returned solution is followed by SA, Gurobi, and QSA. Time limit settings are 3 s, except for case1354 (3*.*8 s) and case1888 (5*.*0 s), due to Leap’s minimal runtime assigns all prosumers to the same community. Finally, SA requirements. performs worst out of the considered solvers, most likely due to the one-hot constraint penalty term in Eq. (11) that requires a large penalty factor to be enforced. Furthermore, jumping until case145, where we see some divergence between the from one feasible state to another requires at least two-bit solution quality for different sub-solvers. flips. This significantly limits the exploration capabilities of The results of DW are significantly worse than the solutions the here-used single-bit-flip SA approach. of the classical and hybrid counterparts for cases other than Of course, more specialized SA routines for one-hot encod- case39. Because the solution quality drops so quickly, we ing [50], as well as hyperparameter tuning, can be considered run DW only until case118. Nonetheless, the results shown to improve the results. However, the authors choose to remain here are the best that have been obtained after extensive with the default implementation provided by D-Wave as this hyperparameter tuning: We utilize a dynamic chain strength work focuses on the performance of the quantum solvers. that increases linearly with the sub-problem size: The *chain strength factor*, i.e., the scaling of the automatically deter- mined chain strengths, is calculated from the following expres- *C. Divisive Algorithm Results* sion 0*.*50 + 0*.*03 *× N*. The values in the formula have been The results for the divisive approach are displayed in Fig. 5. estimated using linear regression on preliminary experiment Here, we analyze the relative solution qualities of Gurobi, SA, data. Based on the research of [51] we include a 20µs pause QSA, Leap BQM, and DW as sub-problem QUBO solvers. into our 60µs annealing schedule of Eq. (4) at the annealing Most notably, solutions in the divisive algorithm do not fraction *s* = 0*.*3. Increasing the number of samples did not diverge as much as in the single-problem approach, except improve the results by much. Hence, we use a moderate 200 for DW. While Leap performs consistently well, a substantial reads from the QPU. Overall, tuned hyperparameters reduce improvement for SA and Gurobi with larger instances can the gap between the best-found solution and the QPU solution be observed compared to the single-problem approach. The substantially by 40% on average. Additionally, the choice of lack of one-hot constraints in the sub-problem formulation of embedding strategy (i.e., the algorithm that selects the chains) the divisive algorithm can most likely explain the vast perfor- did not play a significant role. Therefore, we utilize clique mance improvement for SA. Except for DW and a couple of embedding provided by D-Wave due to its fast wall-clock outliers, all algorithms consistently find the identical solution runtimes. A further improvement through approximation of the

10

| Gurobi 0.22 0.02 0.05 0.11 0.13 1.00 0.99 QSA -0.01 0.01 0.01 0.09 0.15 0.18 0.33 SA 0.67 0.80 0.88 0.91 0.93 1.04 1.08 case39 case57 case89 case118 case145 case200 case300 | 0.22 | 0.02 | 0.05 | 0.11 | 0.13 | 1.00 | 0.99 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | -0.01 | 0.01 | 0.01 | 0.09 | 0.15 | 0.18 | 0.33 |
|  | 0.67 | 0.80 | 0.88 | 0.91 | 0.93 | 1.04 | 1.08 |

Leap with the divisive algorithm since the single-problem formulation is more flexible and allows for discovering the optimal solution. The divisive approach, on the other hand, is greedy, and the optimal solution at every sub-problem will not guarantee the optimal overall solution. However, since the flexibility of the single-problem formulation comes with Fig. 7. Improvement of solution quality when using the divisive approach. increased problem complexity, it becomes a disadvantage after Gurobi and QSA benefit for larger instances. SA shows a strong improvement case145, and the more restricted divisive approach returns for all cases and while it could not compete on the single-problem (Fig 4), better results. The classical heuristic Louvain consistently with divisive it performs on par with the best solvers (Fig. 5). However, the divisive approach requires more runtime than the single-problem approach as yields good results but, on average, not the best ones. It each sub-problem can run for 3 s compared to the single-problem runtime of remains important to note that the single-problem approach 6 s total. with its 6 s time limit is generally faster than the divisive approach, taking, for instance, 50 to 70 s for Gurobi to finish

| 1.00 Quality 0.98 Solution Leap Divisive 0.96 Leap Single-Problem Louvain c a se 3 9 c a se 5 7 c a se 8 9 c a se 1 1 8 c a se 1 4 5 c a se 2 0 0 c a se 3 0 0 |  |  |  |  |  | Leap Divisi Leap Single Louvain | ve -Problem |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

case300. Auxillary experiments have shown that increasing the single-problem time limit to this runtime slightly improves the solution qualities for SA and Gurobi. However, the general pattern of Fig. 4 still remains. VIII. CONCLUSION This research developed a mathematical problem formu- lation for finding self-reliant partitions of a power grid in Fig. 8. Comparison of single-problem Leap CQM, Louvain and divisive Leap terms of Self-Reliant Community Detection (SRCD). We BQM. In the smaller instances, Leap on single-problem approach produces demonstrated that solving the problem classically leads to the best results (up until case145). But in larger instances, Leap with the an exponentially increasing runtime. Furthermore, we demon- divisive approach wins. As expected by our definition, one solver will always achieve a relative solution quality of one. On average, one of the Leap solvers strated the effectiveness of our problem formulations regarding performs slightly better than Louvain for all case sizes. the power flow between communities and the self-reliance of identified communities. Tailored to the problem formulation, we have presented two heuristics. The first one is based on a QUBO by pruning elements with small magnitude, similar to purely classical community detection heuristic called Louvain. Ref. [52], has been attempted without success. The second is a hierarchical divisive algorithm, that iteratively Furthermore, we investigate the classical and hybrid solvers’ splits sub-grids into two parts by solving QUBO sub-problems. performance on the first split sub-problem in Fig. 6 for The sub-problem QUBOs are significantly less demanding more substantial problem instances. Here, the gap in solution than the full-problem QUBO since the amount of binary quality widens. While Leap performs persistently well and has variables is reduced and no one-hot constraints are necessary. the most compact variance between different runs, SA still We benchmark the solution capabilities of various classical manages to keep up even for huge instances. For Gurobi and solvers (Gurobi, Louvain, SA, and QSA), cloud-based hybrid QSA, we see a drop in relative performance between case300 quantum-classical methods (Leap), and the direct usage of a and case1354. This continues the divisive algorithm trend QA processor (DW), both provided by D-Wave. The solution in Fig. 5. Furthermore, the effect is only accentuated by the quality was measured on different IEEE grid test cases with problem size quadrupling between these cases. multiple consumption and production data samples. Overall, Leap provided the most promising results when used on *D. Comparison of Approaches* both the larger, more complex QUBOs and the sub-problem QUBOs of the divisive approach. The results indicate that the As mentioned, the comparability between the single- divisive approach outperforms the single-problem approach problem formulation and the divisive approach is limited due to different runtime settings. However, it can still serve as an for more challenging instances. Nevertheless, our modified important guide for the relative performance of the different Louvain performs almost on par with the Leap solvers. approaches. Furthermore, additional experiments have shown The remaining classical solvers performed significantly bet- that even with an increased timeout set to the total runtime of ter in conjunction with the divisive algorithm than on the the divisive algorithm, we do not see a great improvement for standalone problem. The performance difference ranges from the single-problem versions of Gurobi and SA. Fig. 7 shows similar (for QSA and Gurobi) to drastically better in the case of that solvers utilizing the divisive approach can greatly improve SA. Nevertheless, Gurobi fails to produce meaningful results their performance on larger instances. Here, SA benefits the within the given time constraints using the single-problem most as the divisive sub-problem formulation does not require approach beyond problems with 200-node power grids. any constraints. Lastly, running the problem on the pure base-QPU demon- Finally, in Fig. 8, the best solvers for each approach (Leap strated that the solution quality was considerably worse than single-problem and Leap divisive) are compared with Lou- that of its competitors and decreased with larger problem vain. Until case145, Leap on the single-problem outperforms instances. Despite performing hyperparameter optimization for

11 the problem at hand, the samples obtained from the QPU were [14] C. Mastroianni *et al.*, “Assessing Quantum Computing Performance for Energy Optimization in a Prosumer Community,” *IEEE Transactions on* only close to the optimal solution in the smallest instance *Smart Grid*, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 444–456, Jan. 2024. case39. [15] E. Farhi *et al.*, “A Quantum Adiabatic Evolution Algorithm Applied to The general problem identified here of self-reliant commu- Random Instances of an NP-Complete Problem,” *Science*, vol. 292, no. 5516, pp. 472–475, Apr. 2001, publisher: American Association for the nity detection could have real-world implications for renew- Advancement of Science. able energy trading and sharing, and in the current search [16] A. Rajak *et al.*, “Quantum annealing: an overview,” *Philosophical Trans-* for quantum utility, identifying useful and computationally *actions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences*, vol. 381, no. 2241, p. 20210417, Dec. 2022, publisher: Royal hard problems is vital to proving the usefulness of quantum Society. computing algorithms to the real-world. Even though NISQ- [17] M. Born and V. Fock, “Beweis des Adiabatensatzes,” *Zeitschrift f¨ur* era quantum devices are not yet up to the task of reliably *Physik*, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 165–180, Mar. 1928. solving these kinds of problems using only quantum com- [18] C. McGeoch and P. Farr´e, “The Advantage System: Performance Up- date,” Tech. Rep., Oct. 2021. puting resources, this work proves valuable in identifying [19] A. Lucas, “Ising formulations of many NP problems,” *Frontiers in* another use case for quantum optimization and showcasing *Physics*, vol. 2, 2014. that quantum-enhanced (hybrid) solution techniques seem to [20] S. Feld *et al.*, “A Hybrid Solution Method for the Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem Using a Quantum Annealer,” *Frontiers in ICT*, vol. 6, offer competitive results in comparison to entirely classical
1. [21] F. Phillipson and H. S. Bhatia, “Portfolio Optimisation Using the D-

methods. Wave Quantum Annealer,” in *Computational Science – ICCS 2021*, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, M. Paszynski *et al.*, Eds. Cham: ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 45–59. [22] D. Bucher *et al.*, “Dynamic Price Incentivization for Carbon Emission The authors would like to thank Kumar Ghosh for the Reduction using Quantum Optimization,” Sep. 2023, arXiv:2309.05502 helpful discussions throughout the course of this research. [quant-ph]. [23] H. Ushijima-Mwesigwa *et al.*, “Graph Partitioning using Quantum This work was supported by the German Federal Min- Annealing on the D-Wave System,” in *Proceedings of the Second Inter-* istry of Education and Research under the funding program *national Workshop on Post Moores Era Supercomputing*, ser. PMES’17. “F¨orderprogramm Quantentechnologien – von den Grundlagen New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Nov. 2017, pp. 22–29. zum Markt” (funding program quantum technologies — from [24] H. Reittu *et al.*, “Towards analyzing large graphs with quantum anneal- basic research to market), project Q-Grid, 13N16177. ing,” in *2019 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data)*, Dec. 2019, pp. 2457–2464. [25] F. G. Gemeinhardt *et al.*, “Quantum k-community detection: algorithm REFERENCES proposals and cross-architectural evaluation,” *Quantum Information Pro- cessing*, vol. 20, no. 9, p. 302, Sep. 2021. [1] G. Colucci *et al.*, “Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach,” [26] J. Stein *et al.*, “NISQ-Ready Community Detection Based on Separation- *IEEE Access*, vol. 11, pp. 98 926–98 938, 2023. Node Identification,” *Mathematics*, vol. 11, no. 15, p. 3323, Jan. 2023, [2] E. Cotilla-Sanchez *et al.*, “Multi-Attribute Partitioning of Power Net- number: 15 Publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. works Based on Electrical Distance,” *IEEE Transactions on Power* [27] S. M. Venkatesh *et al.*, “Gcs-q: Quantum graph coalition structure *Systems*, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 4979–4987, Nov. 2013. generation,” in *Computational Science – ICCS 2023*, J. Mikyˇska *et al.*, [3] P. Koukaras *et al.*, “An interdisciplinary approach on efficient virtual Eds. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, pp. 138–152. microgrid to virtual microgrid energy balancing incorporating data [28] S. Kirkpatrick *et al.*, “Optimization by Simulated Annealing,” *Science*, preprocessing techniques,” *Computing*, vol. 104, no. 1, pp. 209–250, vol. 220, no. 4598, pp. 671–680, May 1983, publisher: American Jan. 2022. Association for the Advancement of Science. [4] Y. Chen *et al.*, “Incorporating Post Zonal Reserve Deployment Transmis- [29] M. Booth *et al.*, “Partitioning Optimization Problems for Hybrid Clas- sion Constraints Into Energy and Ancillary Service Co-Optimization,” sical/Quantum Execution,” *D-Wave Technical Report Series*, Oct. 2017. *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 537–549, Mar. [30] Gurobi Optimization, LLC, “Gurobi Optimizer Reference Manual,”
1. [5] M. Fern´andez-Campoamor *et al.*, “Community Detection in Electrical
2. [31] C. Zhao *et al.*, “Power Grid Partitioning Based on Functional Commu-

Grids Using Quantum Annealing,” Dec. 2021, arXiv:2112.08300 [quant- nity Structure,” *IEEE Access*, vol. 7, pp. 152 624–152 634, 2019. ph]. [32] J. Li *et al.*, “Controlled Partitioning of a Power Network Considering [6] C. O’Meara *et al.*, “Quantum Software Architecture Blueprints for the Real and Reactive Power Balance,” *IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid*, Cloud: Overview and Application to Peer-2-Peer Energy Trading,” in vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 261–269, Dec. 2010. *2023 IEEE Conference on Technologies for Sustainability (SusTech)*, [33] Y. Jia and Z. Xu, “A Direct Solution to Biobjective Partitioning Problem Apr. 2023, pp. 191–198. in Electric Power Networks,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, [7] U. Brandes *et al.*, “Maximizing Modularity is hard,” Aug. 2006, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 2481–2483, May 2017. arXiv:physics/0608255. [34] I. Kamwa *et al.*, “Automatic Segmentation of Large Power Systems Into [8] S. Pahwa *et al.*, “Optimal intentional islanding to enhance the robustness Fuzzy Coherent Areas for Dynamic Vulnerability Assessment,” *IEEE* of power grid networks,” *Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 1974–1985, Nov. *Applications*, vol. 392, no. 17, pp. 3741–3754, Sep. 2013.
1. [35] R. J. S´anchez-Garc´ıa *et al.*, “Hierarchical Spectral Clustering of Power

[9] V. D. Blondel *et al.*, “Fast unfolding of communities in large networks,” *Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment*, vol. 2008, Grids,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2229– no. 10, p. P10008, Oct. 2008. 2237, Sep. 2014. [10] A. Abbas *et al.*, “Quantum Optimization: Potential, Challenges, and the [36] M. Guerrero *et al.*, “Community detection in national-scale high voltage Path Forward,” Dec. 2023, arXiv:2312.02279 [quant-ph]. transmission networks using genetic algorithms,” *Advanced Engineering* [11] L. K. Grover, “A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database *Informatics*, vol. 38, pp. 232–241, Oct. 2018. search,” in *Proceedings of the twenty-eighth annual ACM symposium on* [37] X. Xu *et al.*, “Structural and Hierarchical Partitioning of Virtual Micro- *Theory of Computing*, ser. STOC ’96. New York, NY, USA: Association grids in Power Distribution Network,” *IEEE Systems Journal*, vol. 13, for Computing Machinery, Jul. 1996, pp. 212–219. no. 1, pp. 823–832, Mar. 2019. [12] Y. Wang and P. S. Krstic, “Prospect of using Grover’s search in the noisy- [38] S. Fortunato, “Community detection in graphs,” *Physics Reports*, vol. intermediate-scale quantum-computer era,” *Physical Review A*, vol. 102, 486, no. 3, pp. 75–174, Feb. 2010. no. 4, p. 042609, Oct. 2020, publisher: American Physical Society. [39] X. Wang *et al.*, “Understanding Communities From a New Functional [13] E. Farhi *et al.*, “A Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm,” Nov. Perspective in Power Grids,” *IEEE Systems Journal*, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 2014, arXiv:1411.4028 [quant-ph]. 3072–3083, Jun. 2022.

12 [40] D. Wang *et al.*, “Quantum Annealing With Integer Slack Variables for Grid Partitioning,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1747–1750, Mar. 2023, conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems. [41] T. Tanjo *et al.*, “Graph partitioning of power grids considering electricity sharing,” *International Journal of Smart Grid and Clean Energy*, 2016. [42] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, *Quantum computation and quantum information*, 10th ed. Cambridge: Cambridge university press, 2010. [43] F. Glover, “Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial intelligence,” *Computers & Operations Research*, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 533–549, Jan. 1986. [44] L. Thurner *et al.*, “Pandapower—An Open-Source Python Tool for Convenient Modeling, Analysis, and Optimization of Electric Power Systems,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 6510–6521, Nov. 2018, conference Name: IEEE Transactions on Power Systems. [45] U. Brandes *et al.*, “On Modularity Clustering,” *IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering*, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 172–188, Feb.
1. [46] A. Clauset *et al.*, “Finding community structure in very large networks,”

*Physical Review E*, vol. 70, no. 6, p. 066111, Dec. 2004, publisher: American Physical Society. [47] V. A. Traag *et al.*, “From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well- connected communities,” *Scientific Reports*, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 5233, Mar. 2019, number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [48] S. M. Venkatesh *et al.*, “QuACS: Variational Quantum Algorithm for Coalition Structure Generation in Induced Subgraph Games,” in *Proceedings of the 20th ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers*, ser. CF ’23. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Aug. 2023, pp. 197–200. [49] T. Boothby *et al.*, “Fast clique minor generation in Chimera qubit connectivity graphs,” *Quantum Information Processing*, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 495–508, Jan. 2016. [50] M. Kumagai *et al.*, “Combinatorial Clustering Based on an Externally- Defined One-Hot Constraint,” in *2020 Eighth International Symposium on Computing and Networking (CANDAR)*, Nov. 2020, pp. 59–68, iSSN: 2379-1896. [51] J. Marshall *et al.*, “Power of Pausing: Advancing Understanding of Thermalization in Experimental Quantum Annealers,” *Physical Review Applied*, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 044083, Apr. 2019, publisher: American Physical Society. [52] I. Sax *et al.*, “Approximate approximation on a quantum annealer,” in *Proceedings of the 17th ACM International Conference on Computing Frontiers*, ser. CF ’20. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, May 2020, pp. 108–117.

1

## Supplementary Material

#### Evaluating Quantum Optimization for Dynamic Self-Reliant Community Detection

I. QPU HYPERPARAMETER TUNING To analyze and possibly improve the performance of the QPU in the divisive approach, we focus on individual bipartite splits, more precisely, the first split, and illustrate the process on case89 as a representative. Like the main part, all experiments were conducted in five instances with five runs each. The initial results showed poor performance of the QPU, where the solution resembled a somewhat random assignment with only a few nodes connected by high-power flow reliably assigned to the same split. In comparison, SA provides clear visual separation between the two identified network sections.

### arXiv:2407.06773v2  [quant-ph]  16 Oct 2024

Each sub-problem QUBO from Eq. (17, main text) is dense and requires couplings between each pair of qubits. Unfortunately, the D-Wave Advantage System only has a maximum connectivity of 15, making a native embedding of logical qubits connected to more than 15 others impossible. Thus, an embedding algorithm has to map a logical qubit to multiple physical qubits on the chip to ensure that the interactions between logical qubits are represented in their entirety. The set of physical qubits representing one logical qubit is called a *chain*, and the coupling value between the individual chain elements is known as *chain strength*, which is responsible for forcing them into a consistent state. When the qubits of the same chain are measured in different states, a so-called *chain break* occurs. The state for the logical qubit will be, by default, determined via a majority vote. We observed that a higher proportion of chain breaks will decrease the quality of the solution. Therefore, one goal is to fine-tune the hyperparameters of the quantum annealing process to reduce chain breaks effectively. This can be done by increasing the chain strength or reducing the chain lengths to expose fewer qubits to conflicting biases (see Sec. II). Simply increasing the chain strength to an arbitrarily large value bears the risk of less flexible qubit states during the annealing process due to limited resolution in the physical implementation of the couplings. Therefore, a too-large coupling factor may have a decremental effect on solution quality. *A. Hyperparamters a) Chain Strength:* The chain strength is recommended to be close to the highest absolute value among the quadratic terms. By default, this is done by D-Wave’s uniform_torque_compensation, compensating for conflicting biases on a chain. We scale the chain strength by a Chain Strength Factor (CSF) ranging from 1 to 5 and investigate its effects on solution quality. We also investigate whether the optimal chain strength differs among instances of the same case or the same-sized sub-problems of different cases. *b) Annealing Time:* While not influencing the chain lengths, increasing the annealing time may also improve performance. D-Wave lets the user either define a custom annealing schedule or choose a constant annealing speed. Refs. [**?**], [**?**] show that custom schedules with annealing pauses might increase the chance of finding an optimal solution and also proposed a method to infer the optimal time and duration for the pause by empirically analyzing similar smaller sub-problems. *c) Number of Reads:* The annealing process is typically carried out multiple times, providing several samples during a solver call. When the best configurations are unlikely to be measured, a higher number of reads increases the chance of sampling them. *d) Embedding:* The embedding strategy is not a hyperparameter in a strict sense but will determine the algorithm used to map logical and physical qubits. D-Wave provides two strategies in their software repository: The deterministic *clique* embedding and the *heuristic* embedding through minorminer [**?**]. Intended for fully connected problems, clique embedding returns even-length chain lengths. It is accessed through DWaveCliqueSampler. In comparison, the heuristic embedding (accessed through DWaveSampler) has a higher variance in its chain lengths and, on average, longer chains, but it has the advantage of being more efficient on sparse problems. *B. Tuning Results* Experiments for hyperparameter tuning show a strong influence of the chain strength on the quality of the solution (see Fig. 1a). It is apparent that both the DWaveCliqueSampler and DWaveSampler perform best with a scaling factor of three in the representative case89. We found an almost linear relationship between the optimal chain strengths for case39, case57, case89, and case118, and sub-problems of their respective sizes derived from larger cases, which enables us to interpolate the optimal chain strength for any given problem size through the following expression CSF = 0*.*496 + 0*.*031 *× N,* which has been found through linear regression of the sampled data. We apply this dynamic chain strength to the divisive algorithm since it presents sub-problems of many different sizes during the solving process. Overall, this improved the

2 0.30 0.30 0.30 0.25 0.25 0.25 0.20 0.20 0.20 SRCD Energy SRCD Energy SRCD Energy 0.15 0.15 0.15 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.05 Embedding 0.05 Sampler 0.05 Embedding MinorMiner MinorMiner MinorMiner 0.00 0.00 0.00 Clique Clique Clique 0.05 0.05 0.05 1 2 3 4 5 20 40 40+20 60 60+20 80 100 200 1000 Chain Strength Factor Annealing Time Reads (a) CSF (b) Annealing Time (c) Number of Reads Fig. 1. The impact of successive parameter tuning on two embedding strategies on one instance of case89. Panel (a) shows that CSF is the dominant hyperparameter, significantly influencing solution quality. In (b), solution quality concerning annealing time is depicted. An annealing time ‘40+20’ refers to a 60µs annealing process including a 20µs pause at *s* = 0*.*3. As expected, a higher number of reads increases solution quality, see (c), since good results with low probability are more likely to be sampled. However, the added QPU cost is unjustified since the effect is small. performance of the divisive method further compared to a static high chain strength and also the strength obtained by uniform_torque_compensation. Fig. 1b shows no significant difference among the constant annealing times. However, there is a slight improvement when a pause of 20 µs was inserted at a previously empirically determined annealing fraction *s* = 0*.*3. The energies obtained from sampling resemble a normal distribution (see Fig. 2a); hence, increasing the number of reads should also increase the chance of obtaining a better solution. Nevertheless, the observed results in Fig. 1c show only insignificant improvement between 100, 200, and even 1000 reads, indicating only a weak effect. To slightly increase the chance for better solutions without using a disproportionate amount of QPU time, we chose 200 reads as a compromise. The clique embedding is particularly sensitive to chain strengths that are too low (see Fig. 1a), but performance did not differ from the minor embedding in the optimal case. No performance difference was observable for the different embedding strategies for the other hyperparameters we looked at. Nevertheless, clique embeddings are predetermined, which makes preprocessing fast compared to the minorminer heuristic and drastically reduces the wall-clock time. Furthermore, we tested two Advantage systems: 5.4 in Germany and 4.1 in the US. But there was no difference worth mentioning between the systems. Since 5.4 is located in Germany (i.e., closer to the authors), the reduced network overhead caused faster overall execution times. The general effect of the tuning parameters was consistent among different instances of the same power system test case. *C. Summary* We showed that tuning the hyperparameters is a crucial step when working directly with the QPU. Although finding the optimal hyperparameters takes additional time and resources, they are stable against changes in a power grid’s power flow. Since electrical grids are not subject to constant significant changes in connections, hyperparameter tuning must only be performed once for a single power grid. We showed that chain strength was the main contributor to performance enhancement, with annealing time and the number of reads having minor roles. Overall, we did observe that tuning improved the solution quality drastically. In the full divisive algorithm, we improved the gap between the QPU solution and the optimal solution by 40% on average. This is composed of 0% in case39 (already good results without tuning), about 40% in case57 and ca. 60% in case89 and case118. The results indicate a clear trend of larger instances benefitting more from hyperparameter optimization. Our analysis did not reveal any significant performance differences between the two embedding strategies or the two tested D-Wave Advantage Systems. However, using DWaveCliqueSampler on the Advantage system 5.4 significantly reduced the wall-clock time due to faster embedding and networking times. In summary, we have significantly improved the quantum annealer’s performance by hyperparameter tuning. II. PROBLEM REDUCTION BY APPROXIMATION While hyperparameter tuning and embedding strategies are two ways to reduce chain breaks without changing the problem, we also investigate how the problem formulation may be approximated in favor of better annealing performance. In particular, this is done by pruning QUBO interactions with small magnitude, lowering the required connectivity of the problem [**?**]. The QUBO matrices of our problems included many close-to-zero quadratic terms that may not influence the solution but only lead to higher connectivity. Clique embedding does not benefit from reducing quadratic terms since it always assumes fully connected logical qubits. Hence, we only investigate the reduction on the DWaveSampler. Fig. 2b shows the solution quality with respect to the reduction fraction, where 0 refers to the original problem and 0*.*8 means that 80% of the smallest magnitude couplings have been removed. Both SA and QPU exhibit almost constant solution quality until about 30% of the

3 12 Solver Tuned MinorMiner 250 0*.*4 Default MinorMiner QPU Average Chain Length Tuned Clique SA 10 Number of Samples 200 Default Clique SRCD Energy 0*.*3 150 8 0*.*2 100 6 0*.*1 50 4 0 *−*0*.*2 *−*0*.*1 0*.*0 0*.*1 0*.*2 0*.*3 0*.*0 0*.*2 0*.*4 0*.*6 0*.*8 0*.*0 0*.*2 0*.*4 0*.*6 0*.*8 Reduction Reduction SRCD Energy (a) Improvement of solution space by tuning (b) Reduction effects for the QPU and SA (c) Decrease of average chain lengths by reduction Fig. 2. Histogram of sample energies for both embedding strategies with and without tuning in Panel (a). Tuning improves the probability of sampling better solutions. Except for the untuned clique embedding, the distributions are close to normal distributions. The total number of samples for each distribution results from the number of reads multiplied by five runs. Panel (b) compares the QPU results with SA when pruning the problem. Reducing quadratic terms approximates the problem and, therefore, also reduces the optimal solution quality. For the QPU, the approximation loss negates the gain from shorter chains up to a reduction ratio of 0.3, but no overall improvement can be observed. Chain lengths decrease with respect to the reduction ratio, as shown in Panel (c). entries have been pruned. For the QPU, one could argue that the solution quality slightly increases at a reduction of 0*.*3. However, that effect is not really significant. As the reduction increases further, the solution quality drops as expected since the approximation alters the QUBO too much. The expected effect of the QPU’s solution quality increasing as the problem complexity decreases could not be observed. However, we can see an improvement regarding chain lengths as we saw an almost linear decrease in average chain length (see Fig. 2c). Naturally, shorter chains also positively affect the chain-break fraction, which describes the number of chains with contradicting qubit states after annealing. Therefore, reducing the chain lengths by approximation did not help increase the quality of the QPU solution in the SRCD sub-problems.
