# 135393

## Parameter Transfers for Warm-Started QAOA

##### c and Frank Leymann

##### a, Felix Truger

##### b, Johanna Barzen

##### d

##### Julian Obst

*Institute of Architecture of Application Systems, University of Stuttgart, Universit¨atsstraße 38, Stuttgart, Germany* Keywords: Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm, Warm-Start. Abstract: Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs) run shallow parameterized quantum circuits on quantum devices and are thus suitable for current limited hardware. However, adverse effects like barren plateaus and local optima may hinder the classical parameter optimization. Warm-starting techniques attempt to alleviate such problems by utilizing pre-computed approximations or known solutions to initialize VQAs. In this work, we analyze a combination of two different kinds of warm-starts, based on biased initial states and parameter transfers, re- spectively. In particular, we investigate a warm-started variant of the Quantum Approximate Optimization Al- gorithm (WS-QAOA) applied to the MAXCUT problem and analyze the transferability of optimized parameter values between random graphs. We leverage their decomposition into subgraphs and regularities among these subgraphs to facilitate parameter transfers for WS-QAOA and demonstrate a transfer for a random graph.

### 1

### INTRODUCTION

natorial optimization problems like the MAXCUT, MINIMUMVERTEXCOVER, and TRAVELINGSALES- Quantum computing is an emerging field in com- PERSON problem (Farhi et al., 2014; Zhang et al., puter science with promising applications in various 2022; Ruan et al., 2020). domains, such as chemistry and optimization (Cao However, VQAs may run into problems like et al., 2018; Harrigan et al., 2021). However, this barren plateaus and local minima (Wang et al., 2021; potential cannot be fully realized yet, as current Bittel and Kliesch, 2021), which are detrimental *Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ)* devices effects in the optimization that may lead to slow con- vergence of the algorithm. One class of approaches are error-prone and the size of quantum circuits that can be executed successfully is limited (Preskill, that tries to circumvent these problems and speed 2018; Leymann and Barzen, 2020). Errors can accu- up the computation are so-called warm-starts (Egger mulate during lengthy computations on quantum de- et al., 2021; Galda et al., 2021; Truger et al., 2024a). The general idea is to give the algorithm an advantage vices, making circuit depth a particular issue. Thus, circuits executed on current hardware should be shal- by utilizing known or efficiently generated results, low. Until fault-tolerant quantum computers become such as optimized parameter values from related available, *Variational Quantum Algorithms (VQAs)* problem instances and classically approximated bridge the gap and make use of current, limited quan- parameterizations or solutions for the problem at tum hardware (Cerezo et al., 2021). hand. Several techniques can be used to warm-start VQAs resort to shallow parameterized quan- quantum algorithms (Truger et al., 2024a). In particular, there are two major groups of approaches tum circuits, frequently referred to as Ans¨atze, that are executed on the quantum computer, while for warm-starting VQAs. The first group encodes an their parameters are adjusted by an optimizer that approximate solution into the algorithm itself. In this is executed on classical hardware. A prominent sense, Egger et al. propose a QAOA variant called warm-started QAOA (WS-QAOA) for the MAXCUT example of such algorithms is the *Quantum Approx- imate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA)* (Farhi et al., problem, that uses an approximate solution to prepare 2014), which is designed to solve various combi- a biased initial state and improve upon the approx- imation (Egger et al., 2021). Similarly, Tate et al. a https://orcid.org/0000-0002-1898-2167 propose a biased initial state directly based on a re- b https://orcid.org/0000-0001-6587-6431 laxation of MAXCUT to warm-start the QAOA (Tate c https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8397-7973 et al., 2023). The second group focuses on obtaining d https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9123-259X 37 Obst, J., Truger, F., Barzen, J., Leymann and F. Parameter Transfers for Warm-Started QAOA. DOI: 10.5220/0013539300004525 In *Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Quantum Software (IQSOFT 2025)*, pages 37-48 ISBN: 978-989-758-761-0 Copyright © 2025 by Paper published under CC license (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0)

IQSOFT 2025 - 1st International Conference on Quantum Software good initial parameter values that are improved upon A partitioning of the nodes of an undirected graph in the optimization. One way to get good parameter into two sets is called a *cut*, with the number of edges values is to identify similar problem instances and between the two sets being the value of the cut. A use their optimized parameters for another instance. MAXCUT or Maximum Cut is thus a partitioning that This transfer of parameters has been investigated, maximizes the number of edges between the two sets. e.g., by Galda et al. for QAOA (Galda et al., 2021). In the case of weighted graphs, the goal is to maxi- This work combines the two approaches and in- mize the sum of the edge weights between both sets. vestigates the possibility of parameter transfers be- The problem is well known to be NP-hard, but can tween instances of the MAXCUT problem for Egger be approximated. Executing the QAOA for a set of et al.’s WS-QAOA. Therefore, we analyze the algo- parameters creates a distribution of cuts, with the ex- rithm’s performance on subgraphs of random graphs pected value of the cut being referred to as the energy. up to degree 5 to explore regularities and a structure The objective of the QAOA is to optimize this energy, for potential parameter transfers. Moreover, we de- thereby producing good cuts. scribe how the insights gained from this analysis are Egger et al. (2021) adapted the QAOA to uti- utilized to determine good parameter values for larger lize approximations to the MAXCUT problem as graphs when warm-starting is employed. We demon- a starting point by encoding them into the initial strate this by finding good initial parameter values for state of the quantum circuit. The adaptation, called a 50-node random graph instance with a maximum *Warm-Started QAOA* (WS-QAOA), makes use of the degree of 5 that are very close to the actual optimum. best known classical approximation algorithm for The remaining sections of this paper are organized the MAXCUT problem by Goemans and Williamson as follows. Section 2 introduces the necessary back- (1995). Thereby the QAOA is enhanced in the sense ground and related work. Section 3 describes how the that less optimization may be necessary if the ini- investigation was performed. The insights and results tial state is biased towards a good solution as a start- as well as their utilization are covered in Section 4. ing point or, conversely, lower QAOA depth suf- Section 5 discusses limitations and possible extension fices to reach a good result quality, making WS- of the method. Finally, Section 6 summarizes our QAOA a promising algorithm for current NISQ hard- work and gives an outlook on possible future work. ware. Specifically, instead of the uniform superpo- sition, each qubit in the initial state of WS-QAOA is more likely to be in either of the states *|*0*⟩*or *|*1*⟩* as prescribed by the approximation obtained from the

### 2

### BACKGROUND AND RELATED

Goemans-Williamson algorithm (GW). The deviation

### WORK

of the initial state from the uniform superposition and the bias towards the approximation is controlled by a The QAOA, one of the most prominent examples regularization parameter ε. In addition, the mixer in of VQAs, was introduced in a seminal work by WS-QAOA is adapted for the modified initial state. Farhi et al. (2014). They illustrate that the algorithm Egger et al. also propose a modified mixer that does can be applied to approximate solutions to the MAX- not have the initial state as a ground state, however, as CUT problem. In short, the parameterized circuit that a first step we focus on the version that is in line with is executed on the quantum computer consists of an the adiabatic evolution behind QAOA. initialization to a uniform superposition and two sub- Another way to warm-start VQAs, is by finding circuits parameterized by ˆγ and ˆβ, respectively. These a good initialization for the Ansatz parameters, e.g., subcircuits are referred to as the problem circuit and by pre-computing viable parameter values or transfer- mixer. The problem circuit is constructed such that ring optimized parameters from related problem in- its ground state is an optimal solution to the problem stances (Truger et al., 2024a). The advantage here at hand, while the mixer’s ground state is the initial is, that all VQAs can be warm-started by parameter state of the overall circuit. The problem circuit and initializations without having to change the underly- mixer are repeated *p* times, which is referred to as ing algorithm. The difficulty lies in finding viable pa- the QAOA depth of the Ansatz. Thus, the overall cir- rameter values that yield good results. One approach cuit implements a trotterized approximation of an adi- is to optimize parameters for a smaller problem in- abatic evolution that aims to achieve a transition from stance and then transferring the optimized parame- the known ground state of the mixer into the unknown ter values to the actual target problem. To this end, ground state of the problem circuit, representing an Galda et al. (2021) investigated the transfer of opti- optimal solution. The algorithm converges towards mal QAOA parameter values for the MAXCUT prob- an optimum with the increase of the QAOA depth *p*. lem between problem instances. In particular, they 38

Parameter Transfers for Warm-Started QAOA considered regular and random graphs up to a degree eter transfer for a targeted problem instance. As was of 8 and 6, respectively. This analysis showed that a shown in the original QAOA paper, the energy values transfer between instances is possible and primarily for a particular graph can be evaluated as the sum over depends on the degree of subgraphs. For instance, a subgraph contributions (Farhi et al., 2014). We inves- transfer between *k*- and *d*-regular instances is likely tigate the QAOA at *p* = 1, where only two parameters to be successful, provided that *k* and *d* are both even need to be optimized. To expand the investigation to or both odd. Our work extends this analysis to WS- *p >* 1 one must conduct the analysis on larger and QAOA, for which the degree alone is not enough to more subgraphs as will be discussed in Section 5. In guarantee a successful transfer anymore. general, the investigation is centered around energy There are several works similar to the ones intro- landscapes of subgraphs. Energy landscapes are cre- duced above. Tate et al. (2023) successfully warm- ated by systematically evaluating the QAOA circuit in start the QAOA for MAXCUT with low-rank Burer- its parameter space and computing the corresponding Monteiro relaxations, while Cain et al. (2022) show energy values. They allow for the comparison of en- that a warm-start that naively initializes the circuit ergy extrema within the parameter space to draw con- with an approximation fails. Shaydulin et al. (2021) clusions about the transferability of parameter values. introduce a repository for optimized QAOA parame- To determine the transferability of parameters for ters that enables parameter transfers. Brandao et al. WS-QAOA, we investigate the energy landscapes for
1. show that the landscapes of large 3-regular

different subgraphs while considering different possi- graphs are instance independent, whereas Akshay ble initial states. Specifically, we assess whether op- et al. (2021) demonstrated a concentration of opti- timal parameter values coincide, i.e., whether good mal QAOA parameters for *p ∈{*1*,*2*}*. Shaydulin values for one instance are also suitable for another. et al. (2023) explain how to transfer parameters for For our purposes, optimal parameters are located at weighted MAXCUT. More generally, Truger et al. maxima, since we investigate the MAXCUT problem. (2024b) document warm-starting patterns for quan- For a fixed set of parameters, the energy is evaluated tum algorithms, including warm-starts via biased ini- according to Equation (1) (cf. Galda et al. (2021)). tial states and warm-starts via parameter transfers. However, none of the work that we are aware of com- *⟨C⟩|*ˆγ*,*ˆβ*⟩*= *⟨*ˆγ*,* ˆβ*|C|*ˆγ*,* ˆβ*⟩* bines a warm-start via a biased initial state with a pa- rameter transfer. = *⟨*ˆγ*,* ˆβ*|* 1 (1*−ZiZj*)*|*ˆγ*,* ˆβ*⟩*

## 2 ∑

The *Quantum Modelling Extension* (QuantME)

## (*i,j*)*∈E

introduces a warm-starting task that conceptually = *|E|* 2 *−*1 (1) facilitates parameter transfers for WS-QAOA in *⟨*ˆγ*,* ˆβ*|ZiZj |*ˆγ*,* ˆβ*⟩* 2 ∑ workflow-based quantum applications (Beisel et al., (*i,j*)*∈E* 2023). In particular, this task provides configuration = *|E|* 2 *−*1 attributes for warm-starting quantum executions uti- *eij*(ˆγ*,* ˆβ) 2 ∑ lizing biased initial states and parameter initializa- (*i,j*)*∈E* tions. However, it does not provide guidance on how *C* in Equation (1) is the problem-specific operator in to effectively combine the two. QAOA and *eij* is the contribution of an individual edge in the set of edges *E*. This means, instead of looking at the graph as a whole, we can break down

### 3

### PARAMETER TRANSFER FOR

the problem by investigating how each edge influ-

### WS-QAOA

ences the energy. The contribution *eij* can be deter- mined by looking at the subgraph that is induced by the edge. The induced subgraph consists of the edge This section introduces our approach to parameter itself, called the *central edge* that connects the *central* transfers for WS-QAOA for the MAXCUT problem. We first give an overview of the decomposition of *nodes*, and all nodes (and connecting edges) that are such parameter transfers based on subgraphs, before at most distance *p* away. Therefore, the worst case is that we have to consider as many subgraphs, as there we provide more details on the concrete experimental are edges in a graph. In reality, however, many sub- setup for our analysis. graphs appear repeatedly. For example, for *k*-regular graphs, there are *k* different subgraphs that need to be

#### 3.1

#### Overview

investigated. Additionally, in WS-QAOA we need to consider different initializations due to different pos- On a high level, our approach considers the transfer- sible approximations encoded into the initial state as ability of parameters for subgraphs to derive a param- 39

IQSOFT 2025 - 1st International Conference on Quantum Software is initialized with 0, and θ*i* = 2arcsin*√*1*−*ε if it is warm-starts. Thus, the number of energy landscapes that need to be taken into account increases in the con- initialized with 1. Thus, a single qubit reproduces text of WS-QAOA compared to standard QAOA. its initialization with probability 1 *−*ε if we were to To facilitate the identification of individual sub- measure it. For example, a qubit of a node initial- graphs we introduce the following notation, which is ized with 0 measures *|*0*⟩*with probability 1 *−*ε. An adapted from Galda et al. (2021): A subgraph is re- example for the WS-QAOA circuit is given in Fig- ferred to as (*x*-*y*)-*z*, where *x ≤y* are the number of ure 1. After constructing the circuit, it is executed neighbors of the two central nodes and *z* is the num- on a simulator where we measure the qubits of the ber of neighbors shared by both nodes. For example, central edge, which are *q*0*,q*1 in all our experiments. the graph in Figure 1 is called (3-3)-0. The portion of measurements, where *q*0*̸* = *q*1 is the probability of the edge being cut, i.e., the energy con- tribution *ei j* of Equation (1). We create the land-

#### 3.2

#### Experimental Setup

scape by sampling the energy in the parameters space (γ*,*β) *∈*[0*,*2π]*×*[0*,*π]. To this end, we sample 30 pa- Assuming a fixed configuration of WS-QAOA, our rameter values for each dimension to obtain the two analysis extends over every possible initialization for sets Γ and *B*, resulting in a total of *|*Γ*| · |B|* = 900 every subgraph of regular graphs up to degree 5. After equidistant samples. Since we are dealing with un- accounting for isomorphisms, this yields 214 different weighted graphs, the landscapes are periodic, and it landscapes. Expanding the scope of the investigation is sufficient to analyze the parameter space within the to random graphs up to degree 5 yields 35 subgraphs given range. and increases the total number of landscapes to 620. For reasons discussed in Section 4.2, this number can be reduced to 558. To create landscapes for a subgraph, one first

### 4

### RESULTS

needs to construct the QAOA circuit, where each node corresponds to one qubit. As discussed previously, we This section presents the results of the analysis for adopt WS-QAOA from Egger et al. (2021) in its ba- subgraphs and the transferability of parameters be- sic form. The first consideration is the depth *p* that tween graphs in WS-QAOA for MAXCUT. In partic- we choose as *p* = 1 resulting in a circuit with two pa- ular, we first look at the landscapes of regular graphs, rameters (γ*,*β) to be optimized and two-dimensional before moving on to random graphs. Next, we intro- energy landscapes that can be illustrated. Addition- duce a transferability map to analyze the transferabil- ally, WS-QAOA can be adjusted by its regulariza- ity in more detail. Finally, we utilize the insights to tion parameter ε *∈*[0*,*0*.*5], where ε = 0*.*5 leads to the find good parameters for a larger graph instance. For original QAOA and lower values increase the influ- verification and reproducibility, the results can be ac- ence of the approximate solution utilized as a warm- cessed online (Obst and Truger, 2024). This includes start. To put more emphasis on the warm-start, we a visualization of all subgraphs with their correspond- choose ε = 0*.*1. To prepare the biased initial state, ing landscapes and numeric data. a rotation *RY* by an angle θ*i* is applied to each qubit *qi*, where θ*i* = 2arcsin*√*ε if the corresponding node

|  | R (2.5) Y |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | R (-2.5) Y |  | R (2β) Z |  | R (2.5) Y |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  | • | • ZZ(-γ) |  |  | • |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | R (0.6) Y |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | R (-0.6) Y |  | R (2β) Z |  | R (0.6) Y |  |
|  |  |  | • |  | • ZZ(-γ) |  |  | • |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | R (0.6) Y |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | R (-0.6) Y |  | R (2β) Z |  | R (0.6) Y |  |
|  |  |  | • |  |  |  | ZZ(-γ) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | R (2.5) Y |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | R (-2.5) Y |  | R (2β) Z |  | R (2.5) Y |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  | • ZZ(-γ) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | R (0.6) Y |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | R (-0.6) Y |  | R (2β) Z |  | R (0.6) Y |  |
|  |  |  | • |  |  |  |  | ZZ(-γ) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | R (0.6) Y |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | R (-0.6) Y |  | R (2β) Z |  | R (0.6) Y |  |
|  |  |  | • |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Figure 1: Example subgraph and its circuit consisting of initialization, problem circuit, and mixer separated by dashed lines. The subgraph is depicted with its initialization where purple and yellow nodes correspond to an initialization of 0 and 1 respectively. Each qubit corresponds to one node of the graph, where the first two qubits *q*0*,q*1 are the central nodes, and each ZZ gate corresponds to an edge in the graph. Since ε = 0*.*1, the parameters of the initial *RY* gates are 2arcsin*√*ε *≈*0*.*64 if the initialization of the corresponding node is 0, and 2arcsin*√*1*−*ε *≈*2*.*50 if the initialization is 1. The parameter values are rounded to one decimal place. 40

Parameter Transfers for Warm-Started QAOA portant to label the central edge, as it is the one be- ing measured as described in Section 3.2. This makes no difference for *d*-regular graphs with *d ≥*3, but is 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* relevant for small random graphs. That way, all 12 *π π π π* different initializations and their corresponding land- 0 0 0 0 scapes are presented in Figure 2. All landscapes are *π π π π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 2 2 2 2 normalized for the visualization. The maximum is the brightest spot and the minimum the darkest. For the transfer of parameters, the actual energy values are 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* less relevant than the locations of extrema, particu- *π π π π* larly the global maxima, as these mark the optimal 0 0 0 0 parameter values. Therefore, we can disregard that *π π π π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 2 2 2 2 scale for transfers and in the visualizations. For a bet- ter illustration of regularities among the landscapes, they are grouped in two categories: The first (left) half 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* shows landscapes where outskirts have a low energy, *π π π π* while the center generally shows a high energy. In the second (right) half, it is the other way around. The 0 0 0 0 *π π π π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 2 2 2 2 difference between the two groups lies in the initial- ization of the central nodes. In the first category, the low high nodes are initialized identically, i.e., the central edge Figure 2: Graph (3-3)-0, one of the three subgraphs of a 3- is not part of the cut. For the second category, the regluar graph, with all its initializations up to isomorphism. edge is part of the cut, i.e., nodes are initialized dif- An initialization with 0 is represented by a purple node, an ferently. Intuitively, this is explained by the fact that initialization with 1 by a yellow node. The central edge that we only look at the energy of the central edge. Given is being measured is highlighted. Values of the landscape a good initialization, parameters that favor the initial are normalized, as we only care about maxima and minima, state, i.e., parameters around zero, should be expected not their exact value. The graphs are ordered such that all to result in high energy values. initializations on the left have central nodes that are initial- ized equally. Additionally, the landscapes are paired with The chosen arrangement of Figure 2 highlights an- their mirrored version on the opposite side. other relationship between the landscapes. The six landscapes on the right-hand side appear to be in-

#### 4.1

#### Landscapes for Regular Graphs

verted mirror images of those on the left-hand side. More precisely, the landscapes on the opposite side In the following, we analyze landscapes for regular have the same shape but appear to be flipped verti- graphs and describe regularities found between the cally/horizontally and inverted, i.e., minima of one landscapes. landscape become maxima in the other and vice versa. Landscapes that are related this way also have a con- **4.1.1 3-Regular Graphs** nection in the respective graphs: Taking one of the central nodes and inverting the initialization of each Examining the landscapes for subgraphs on their own adjacent node, including the other central node, re- helps us gain a better understanding of the reasons for sults in an isomorphic graph. Future work may good transferability and identify regularities among provide a better understanding of this phenomenon the results. First, we focus on the subgraphs of regular through a deeper mathematical analysis. graphs, as their regularities also appear in other sub- graphs. Figure 2 shows the most general subgraph in **4.1.2 Subgraphs with Common Neighbors** the sense that there are no common neighbors among the nodes of the central edge. The graph is depicted As mentioned before, we can understand the sub- with every possible initialization indicated by a color graphs (*x*-*y*)-*z* with *z ≥*1 as a version of the coding: Nodes initialized to 0 are colored in purple, graph (*x*-*y*)-0 where the central nodes have *z* com- nodes initialized to 1 are colored in yellow. Isomor- mon neighbors. Analogous to the observations of phisms are not shown, as they produce identical re- Galda et al. (2021), the landscapes of *k*-regular sub- sults. Moreover, we also consider it an isomorphism graphs are very similar for a fixed *k* when their ini- if all initializations of the nodes are inverted, as such tialization is equivalent, as explained in the follow- configurations would also result in the same energy ing. This fact is demonstrated in Figure 3 with equiv- values. When checking for isomorphisms, it is im- alent initializations for the subgraphs (3-3)-0, (3-3)-1, 41

IQSOFT 2025 - 1st International Conference on Quantum Software 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 2*π π π π π π π π* 0 0 0 0 *π π π π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 2 2 2 2 0 0 0 Figure 3: Subgraphs of 3-regular graphs with similar land- *π π π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 0 *π* 2 2 2 scapes. From left to right, the subgraphs are (3-3)-0, (3- Figure 4: Different types of graphs that produce similar 3)-1, (3-3)-1, (3-3)-2. Similar landscapes arise when identi- landscapes. Neighbors that are initialized oppositely (one cally initialized neighbors are merged into a common neigh- is 0, the other is 1) cancel each other out. Removing them bor of both central nodes. The MAD between the normal- does not substantially affect the landscape, i.e., the MAD ized landscapes is at most 0.03. The second and third land- between them is smaller than 0.04. scape look alike, because splitting the common neighbor would result in isomorphic graphs. **4.1.3 Node Canceling** and (3-3)-2, which induce resembling landscapes. To We briefly extend the analysis to subgraphs of quantify this similarity, we determine the *Mean Ab-* 5-regular graphs, whose landscapes exhibit similari- *solute Difference (MAD)*. For two normalized energy ties with those of 3-regular graphs. Namely, all land- landscapes *E*1*,E*2 and sets of parameter values Γ*,B* it scapes of graph (3-3)-0 are also present among those is calculated as follows: for (5-5)-0. An example is depicted in Figure 4. 1 Again, the similarity is due to a connection between MAD(*E*1*,E*2) = ∑ *|E*1(γ*,*β)*−E*2(γ*,*β)*|* the underlying graphs: The central nodes of the (5-5)- *|*Γ*|·|B|* (γ*,*β)*∈*Γ*×B* 0 instance each have two neighbors that are initialized Since the energy is in the interval [0*,*1], identical land- differently. Disregarding such pairs of neighbors and scapes have an MAD of 0 and opposite landscapes removing them from the graph on both sides of the have an MAD of 1. In Figure 3, the graph (3-3)-1 central edge results in the graph (3-3)-0 which pro- is shown twice with different initialization, yet their duces the same landscape. In that sense, nodes can landscapes look identical. To be precise, their MAD cancel each other out and some initializations for (5- is 0.02. While they are in fact non-isomorphic, the 5)-0 can be reduced to an equivalent initialization for similarity appears because of their relation to (3-3)- (3-3)-0. We refer to this as node canceling. 0: In both cases, replacing the common neighbor of the central nodes with two identically initialized sep-

#### 4.2

#### Random Graphs

arate nodes would create the same version of (3-3)- 0, i.e., the initialization of these subgraphs is equiva- The analysis can also be extended to random graphs. lent to the one depicted for (3-3)-0. Hence, (3-3)-0 is In particular, the observations regarding common the most general of the three subgraphs, as it allows neighbors and node canceling as introduced above for the largest number of initializations, and “split- also apply to subgraphs of random graphs up to a ting” common neighbors by replacing them with sep- degree of 5. There are 35 subgraphs with a total arate nodes returns one of these instances. Since both of 620 initializations. However, due to equivalent graphs are descendants of the same parent, we con- initializations of graphs with common neighbors, sider only one of them in further analyses. these can be reduced to 558 that need to be ana- Increasing *z*, i.e., introducing common neighbors, lyzed. For subgraphs of random graphs, the number does not induce additional initializations to consider of neighbors of the central nodes can differ. For over those known for the most general subgraph. example, the subgraph (3-5)-0 has a central node that Conversely, there are initializations for (3-3)-0 for is missing two neighbors compared to (5-5)-0. The which there is no equivalent initialization for (3-3)-1 rightmost example in Figure 4 illustrates that node or (3-3)-2. For example, in the top right graph de- canceling also leads to resembling landscapes for picted in Figure 2, the neighbors of the central nodes these types of subgraphs. are initialized both with 1 and both with 0, respec- However, subgraphs of random graphs also intro- tively. Thus, no pair of these nodes could be merged duce landscapes with shapes that are not present for into a common neighbor and there is no equivalent regular graphs. Specifically, these landscapes appear initialization for (3-3)-1. when the central nodes have a mixed parity, i.e., one central node has an even and the other has an odd de- gree. Still, subgraphs of random graphs exhibit the 42

Parameter Transfers for Warm-Started QAOA same regularities as regular graphs, such as the mir- an arrangement that is beneficial for the illustration of rored relationship, merged nodes, and node cancel- some key observations. In particular, the graphs are ing. Node cancelling is particularly interesting, as we ordered by increasing minimum degree *x* and increas- can also go in the opposite direction. Instead of re- ing maximum degree *y*, i.e., first all the graphs (1-*∗*), moving nodes, we can also add them to a graph, until then (2-*∗*), etc. In addition, within each category, the both central nodes have the same number of neigh- number of merged nodes *z* increases. The initializa- bors. That way, subgraphs of random graphs can be tions of a single subgraph are divided into two groups, related to those of regular graphs. Clearly, this is only the first having identically initialized central nodes, possible if both central nodes have the same parity, the second having central nodes initialized oppositely. i.e., the degree of the central nodes is either even or The complete ordering of initializations of a subgraph odd for both, as we add two nodes at a time. There- can be found online (Obst and Truger, 2024) together fore, subgraphs of random graphs fall in one of two with all landscapes. categories: Either their central nodes have the same parity, or they have mixed parity. **4.3.2 Key Observations** As the transferability map contains a substantial

#### 4.3

#### Transferability Map

amount of information, we draw attention to key ob- servations that unveil its utility. For one, the map This section examines the parameter transferability facilitates finding a suitable donor graph for a given between subgraphs of random graphs up to a degree subgraph by scanning the respective row to identify of 5 in more detail. To this end, we create a transfer- good candidates for a parameter transfer. Moreover, ability map that visualizes the quality of such trans- the map helps to identify certain patterns and regular- fers. We describe the construction of the transferabil- ities, to estimate the success of parameter transfers, ity map, the key observations, and the influence of the and to gain insights into properties that can be used to degree of central nodes on the transferability. make more general statements about transferability. An important observation is, that the initialization **4.3.1 Constructing the Transferability Map** introduced with WS-QAOA significantly influences To quantify the transferability between different sub- the transferability. To be precise, the transferabili- graphs we determine a *transferability coefficient* τ. It ties described by Galda et al. (2021) no longer apply when a biased initial state is introduced, as these con- is calculated by taking the sampled optimal parame- ters of one subgraph, the donor graph, and evaluating ditions relied on graph structure alone. For example, their performance for another subgraph, the acceptor optimal parameters of a subgraph were trivially trans- graph. Determining the transferability is straightfor- ferable to the same subgraph. However, for the same instance in WS-QAOA with different initializations, ward given the sampled landscapes. The transferabil- ity coefficient τ can be computed as follows: such transfers may fail. In particular, this is the case across initializations where the central edge is cut and   others where the central edge is not cut, i.e., the two *E*acc(γmax*,*βmax) avg (2) τ = groups described earlier. This restriction is visible in max  γ*,*β *{E*acc(γ*,*β)*}* γmax*,*βmax the map by the fact that almost all subgraphs have We take the locations of global maxima in the sam- four distinct sectors that appear like a checkerboard pattern (see Figure 5 box A). Note that such a section pled landscape, (γmax*,*βmax), of the donor subgraph (there can be multiple maxima), evaluate the energy contains all possible initializations for a single sub- *E*acc of the acceptor graph at these locations, normal- graph. The four sectors reflect all possible transfers ize by the maximum energy of the acceptor graph and for the different initializations of the central nodes of the donor and acceptor graph. They illustrate, that a average the values. The coefficient τ is a value be- tween 0 and 1, where 0 is the worst possible transfer- transfer is most successful, when the central nodes are ability and 1 is the optimal transferability. either initialized identically in both graphs or initial- ized differently in both. Figure 5 shows the transferability coefficient for The next observation is, that the number of com- every pair of two subgraphs and every initialization. As Galda et al. noted, transferability is a directional mon neighbors has little influence on the transferabil- property. Therefore, the map is not symmetric along ity (B), which is reflected in the similarity of sections separated by dotted lines in Figure 5. This occurs be- its diagonal axis. The appearance of the map depends cause splitting common neighbors results in very sim- on the arrangement of the subgraphs and their initial- izations. While there are multiple possibilities to or- ilar landscapes, as discussed above and shown in Fig- der the graphs and their initializations, we decided for ure 3. This phenomenon is already present when no 43

IQSOFT 2025 - 1st International Conference on Quantum Software Donor subgraph (1-*∗*) (2-*∗*) (3-3) (3-4) (3-5) (4-4) (4-5) (5-5) (1-*∗*) 1*.*0 (2-2) (2-3) (2-4) (2-5) 0*.*8 (3-3) (3-4) Transferability Coefﬁcient 0*.*6 Acceptor subgraph (3-5) (4-4) 0*.*4 (4-5) 0*.*2 (5-5) 0*.*0 A B C Figure 5: *Transferability coefficients* between every pair of subgraphs forming the *Transferability Map*. Each pixel is a coefficient τ *∈*[0*,*1]. Dark colors indicate a bad transferability, bright colors indicate a good transferability. Each row is an acceptor graph, each column a donor graph. Thick white lines distinguish graphs with differing minimum degree. Dashed white lines separate graphs with different degrees of the central nodes, dotted lines further divide the number of common neighbors. Overall, there are 35 subgraphs with a total of 558 initializations, starting with low degrees up to degree 5. For clarity, some of the labels are omitted: (1-*∗*) stands for (1-1) through (1-5), (2-*∗*) stands for (2-2) through (2-5). The highlighted sections and labels A, B, C serve as references for the observations described in Section 4.3.2. biased initial state is involved (Galda et al., 2021). For sulting in either a perfect transfer or the worst pos- our purposes, this means that we need to prioritize the sible. Interestingly, these patches only appear for initialization over the exact type of graph when look- donors whose central nodes are initialized the same. ing for a suitable donor graph. However, the other sector, where the central nodes of Distinctive features of the map are absolutely per- donor and acceptor are initialized oppositely, also ex- fect and disastrous transferabilities in some cases (C). hibits relatively high coefficients. This sector is par- These become apparent as yellow and black patches ticularly important for a parameter transfer of WS- in Figure 5, most notably in the sections of (4-5). QAOA, as we will discuss in Section 4.4. Here we have optimal and worst case transferability with coefficients of 1 and 0, respectively. This is due **4.3.3 Influence of Node Degrees** to the shape of the respective landscapes, which ex- Another important characteristic is the degree of the hibit either exactly one maximum or one minimum central nodes, particularly, their parity. Galda et al. al- that is located right at the center of the landscape, re- ready described this and noted that a transfer between 44

Parameter Transfers for Warm-Started QAOA *k*-regular and *d*-regular graphs is likely to be success- subgraphs as described in Section 3.1. We can lever- ful, provided *k* and *d* are either both even or both odd age the insights described above to obtain an approx- (Galda et al., 2021). When taking the initialization of imation of the landscape of the target graph shown in the central edge into account, this also seems to hold Figure 6, from which we can derive a good parame- with warm-starts in place. For example, (5-5) appears terization. Specifically, subgraphs can be transformed to be a better donor for (3-3) than (4-4). into a standardized format to increase the number of They also found that there is a good transfer- isomorphic subgraphs, thereby reducing the number ability between graphs (*j*-*k*) and (*l*-*m*) provided that of subgraphs that need to be considered and minimiz- *{ j,k,l,m}* are all odd or all even. This also seems ing the effort required to determine good parameter true for WS-QAOA. For example, (3-5) as an accep- values. The first simplification is to consider only tor has brighter sections when receiving parameters subgraphs of the form (*x*-*y*)-0 by splitting common from (5-5) rather than (4-4). Conversely, a transfer neighbors of the central nodes. Since the landscapes from odd to even parity is also unlikely to be success- are very similar before and after the split, we do not ful. Notably, for (4-4) as an acceptor, the graph (2-4) lose much information. Further, a graph falls in one appears to be a better donor than (3-3). Interestingly, of three categories: Both central nodes have even graphs with even degrees do not show a checkerboard degrees, both have odd degrees or their degrees are pattern when receiving parameters from mixed parity mixed. To transform these subgraphs further, we can donors. An example for this would be (4-4) accepting utilize the node canceling effects, i.e., add and remove parameters from (4-5). nodes that cancel out. In case that both central nodes Moreover, Galda et al. showed cases of good have even degrees, we can add two oppositely initial- transferability between subgraphs with mixed parity. ized nodes at a time to a central node until the graph With WS-QAOA, there seems to be good transferabil- takes the form of (4-4). If their degrees are odd, we ity if both donor and acceptor graph have a mixed par- can add as many pairs as necessary to end up with (5- ity, since the aforementioned sections with yellow and 5), and for mixed parity we can transform them into black patches appear in exactly these cases. instances of (4-5). In total, these 3 graphs allow for 90 different initializations. Adding up the energy values of the subgraphs

#### 4.4

#### Application for Transferability

with the respective initializations for each sampled point results in the true energy landscape of the tar- This section describes, how we can use the above get graph. This true energy landscape is illustrated on insights to obtain viable parameter values for larger the left-hand side of Figure 6. Transforming the sub- graphs composed of subgraphs. To this end, we de- graphs before applying this procedure generates the compose a larger graph into its subgraphs and try to approximate landscape next to it. The target graph reduce the number of subgraphs that we have to con- consists of 38 different subgraphs, with the 3 most sider. We illustrate this application by determining vi- frequent appearing 8, 7, and 5 times, respectively. able parameter values for the 50-node random graph The simplifying transformations halve the number of with 75 edges and a maximum degree of 5 shown in different subgraphs to 19, with the 3 most frequent Figure 6. A suitable initialization for the MAXCUT ones appearing 11, 10, and 9 times, respectively. problem on this graph was determined using the GW These 3 most frequent subgraphs produce the land- algorithm (Goemans and Williamson, 1995). scape shown on the right-hand side of Figure 6. The following procedure is based on the fact, that the total energy is composed of contributions of the True Energy Approximate Energy Energy of Top 3 2*π* 2*π* 2*π* 60 60 25 50 50 *π π π* 20 40 40 15 0 0 0 *π π π π π π* 0 0 0 2 2 2 Figure 6: Approximating the landscape of the graph on the left. The 50-node graph is pictured with its initialization, calculated by the GW algorithm. Landscapes from left to right are the true energy landscape, its approximation after transforming all the subgraphs to an equivalent of the form (4-4), (4-5), or (5-5), and the approximation of the landscape by only considering the 3 most frequent graphs after the simplifying transformations. 45

IQSOFT 2025 - 1st International Conference on Quantum Software As a first observation, the landscapes show low the most frequent subgraphs and optimize the energy energy values in the center and high energy values of their central edges. The parameter values can then near the edges. Thus, they fall into the second group be used as an initialization for the instance at hand. of landscapes, where the central edge is cut (cf. Sec- We suspect, that there is a concentration of good pa- tion 4.1.1). This is expected because the initialization rameters in proximity to the optimal parameters of our is derived from a good approximation utilized for the example. However, further research is required to ver- warm-start, resulting in subgraphs where many cen- ify whether this is the case. tral edges are already cut, i.e., initialized oppositely. As mentioned in Section 3.2, the choice of ε = 0*.*1 Further, it is expected that most of the subgraphs will puts more emphasis on the initialization. However, have many such edges, similar to the top right graph this parameter can also be selected differently or even of Figure 2. Therefore, the overall landscape resem- optimized, depending on the objective function in bles the landscape of these subgraphs. Thus, an even use (Truger et al., 2022). Such alternative objective simpler transfer would be taking optimized parame- functions for WS-QAOA may lead to different re- ters from one of these graphs. sults for the landscapes and regularities for parameter Evidently, the landscapes of Figure 6 appear very transferability. similar despite the simplifications described above. In The number of possible initializations grows particular, the MAD of true and approximate energy rapidly with the size of the graph. For this reason, we is smaller than 0.02. If we consider only the three only analyzed graphs up to degree 5, which may be most frequent graphs, the landscape changes notice- sufficient for some use cases. While we suspect that ably, but not substantially. Since we only considered the regularities described above generalize to larger the energy of 30 subgraphs for the latter, the total en- degrees, it is unclear whether they actually hold. It ergy values are generally lower than in the original would be interesting to see the transferability in WS- landscape. However, it is not the total energy value QAOA for graphs up to degree 8 as analyzed by Galda that is crucial for obtaining good parameter values et al. Since many of their findings for standard QAOA as mentioned in Section 4.1.1, but rather the location are consistent with ours for WS-QAOA, we suspect of the maxima, that need to remain close. Keep in that the regularities also hold for degrees up to 8. mind, that the parameters (γ*,*β) were sampled in the However, an analysis could provide further insights range of [0*,*2π] *×* [0*,*π] with 30 samples per dimen- into the impact of the degree on transferability. sion. For the first approximation, the maximizing pa- To calculate the transferability coefficient, we rameters are off by only one sample in the direction sampled landscapes, which are limited to the grid of of β, i.e., we are off by 30 from the sampled maxi- π points that were evaluated. Therefore, there may be mum. Surprisingly, the second approximation from even better parameterizations than those correspond- the top three subgraphs retains the maximum at the ing to the maxima in the sampled landscapes, which exact same sample position as the true energy. could be obtained by additional optimization. Nev- What the experiments have shown is, that we may ertheless, the sampled landscapes appear smooth and only focus our attention towards subgraphs that have thus sufficient for the analysis of parameter transfers. a central edge that is cut, as these are the most fre- As noted above, our analysis is centered on a quent ones. Additionally, it can suffice to consider QAOA depth of *p* = 1. While we suspect that some of only three types of graphs, one for each of the cate- the regularities may also be present for *p >* 1 and that gories of even, odd, and mixed parity. techniques for determining good parameters could still be applied, further study is required for confir- mation. Such an investigation would involve larger subgraphs, since edges that are distance *p* away from

### 5

### DISCUSSION AND

the central edge form the subgraph and contribute to

### LIMITATIONS

its energy. This implies that more types of subgraphs need to be analyzed, and more initializations have to While we analyzed many different subgraphs, and be considered. The rapid growth of initializations that demonstrated how to successfully transfer parame- comes with increasing subgraph size may render an ters, there still remain open questions. Here, we dis- analysis as thorough as for *p* = 1 impractical. More cuss limitations of our study and how these shortcom- than two circuit parameters further complicate an in- ings may be addressed. vestigation, requiring the sampling of significantly For one, it is not always feasible to calculate more data points and limiting the visualization. the entire landscape, e.g., when larger QAOA depths Thus far, our analysis is limited to unweighted *p >* 1 are involved. In such cases, it is beneficial to re- graphs. Investigating weighted graphs requires a dif- sort to the simplifications introduced above, identify 46

Parameter Transfers for Warm-Started QAOA ferent approach, as the enumeration of every subgraph algorithms or variations like the modified mixer pro- is impossible with weights. Previous work explored a posed by Egger et al. (2021) would be an interesting transfer of QAOA parameters for the MAXCUT prob- expansion. Another idea would be the investigation of lem on weighted graphs (Shaydulin et al., 2023). It is similar parameter transfers for WS-QAOA in the con- unclear how weighted graphs affect the transferability text of the MAXCUT problem for weighted graphs, as of optimal parameters for WS-QAOA. discussed in Section 5. Our analysis was conducted based on noise- less quantum simulation, however, using error-prone NISQ hardware may pose additional challenges and

### ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

potentials for the approach of parameter transfers in (WS-)QAOA. In particular, it was shown that apply- This work was funded in part by the BMWK ing the *circuit cutting* concept to QAOA for MAX- projects *SeQuenC* (01MQ22009B) and *EniQmA* CUT by breaking down the graph at hand can sig- (01MQ22007B) nificantly reduce the effects of noise on NISQ de- vices (Bechtold et al., 2023). Circuit cutting focuses on partitioning circuits into multiple smaller circuits,

### REFERENCES

whose individual execution results are post-processed to obtain the original circuit’s result. On a higher Akshay, V., Rabinovich, D., Campos, E., and Biamonte, J. level, the approach of parameter transfers for WS- (2021). Parameter concentrations in quantum approx- QAOA based on subgraph decomposition is similar imate optimization. *Physical Review A*, 104(1). to circuit cutting, since the subgraph decomposition Bechtold, M., Barzen, J., Leymann, F., Mandl, A., Obst, J., in our approach also results in an effective breakdown Truger, F., and Weder, B. (2023). Investigating the ef- on the circuit level. Therefore, parameter transfers fect of circuit cutting in QAOA for the MaxCut prob- for (WS-)QAOA based on subgraphs likely allow for lem on NISQ devices. *Quantum Science and Technol-* similar advantages on current hardware. *ogy*, 8(4). Beisel, M., Barzen, J., Bechtold, M., Leymann, F., Truger, F., and Weder, B. (2023). QuantME4VQA: Modeling and Executing Variational Quantum Algorithms Using

### 6

### SUMMARY AND FUTURE

Workflows. In *Proceedings of the 13th International*

### WORK

*Conference on Cloud Computing and Services Science (CLOSER 2023)*, pages 306–315. SciTePress. Bittel, L. and Kliesch, M. (2021). Training Variational In this paper, we investigated a combination of two Quantum Algorithms Is NP-Hard. *Physical Review* warm-starting techniques for the QAOA applied to *Letters*, 127:120502. the MAXCUT problem. The techniques in question Brandao, F. G. S. L., Broughton, M., Farhi, E., Gutmann, S., are starting the computation with a biased initial state and Neven, H. (2018). For Fixed Control Parameters following Egger et al.’s WS-QAOA (Egger et al., the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm’s
1. and initializing parameters by transfers from

Objective Function Value Concentrates for Typical In- subgraph instances (Galda et al., 2021). To this end, stances. *arXiv:1812.04170*. we analyzed energy landscapes of subgraphs of ran- Cain, M., Farhi, E., Gutmann, S., Ranard, D., and Tang, E. dom graphs up to a degree of 5. We documented a (2022). The QAOA gets stuck starting from a good number of regularities among the graphs and their ini- classical string. *arXiv:2207.05089*. tializations that can be leveraged to derive suitable ini- Cao, Y., Romero, J., and Aspuru-Guzik, A. (2018). Poten- tial of quantum computing for drug discovery. *IBM* tial parameters for larger graphs. The application of *Journal of Research and Development*, 62(6):6:1– these insights was demonstrated on a 50-node graph 6:20. instance initialized with a suitable approximation en- Cerezo, M., Arrasmith, A., Babbush, R., Benjamin, S. C., coded into the biased initial state. We found, that a Endo, S., Fujii, K., McClean, J. R., Mitarai, K., few small subgraph instances suffice to acquire good Yuan, X., Cincio, L., and Coles, P. J. (2021). Vari- initial parameter values for the target graph. ational quantum algorithms. *Nature Reviews Physics*, For future work, it would be interesting to increase 3(9):625–644. the scope of the approach, e.g., to graphs of higher Egger, D. J., Mareˇcek, J., and Woerner, S. (2021). Warm- degrees or increased QAOA depth *p* to see whether starting quantum optimization. *Quantum*, 5:479. the regularities continue and to observe potential new Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., and Gutmann, S. (2014). ones. Further, some questions remain open, for ex- A Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm. *arXiv:1411.4028*. ample why the landscapes of two categories exhibit a mirror relationship. Additionally, tackling different 47

IQSOFT 2025 - 1st International Conference on Quantum Software Galda, A., Liu, X., Lykov, D., Alexeev, Y., and Safro, I. Warm-Starting and Quantum Computing: A System- (2021). Transferability of optimal QAOA parameters atic Mapping Study. *ACM Computing Surveys*, 56(9). between random graphs. In *2021 IEEE International* Truger, F., Barzen, J., Beisel, M., Leymann, F., and Yus- *Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering* supov, V. (2024b). Warm-Starting Patterns for Quan- *(QCE)*, pages 171–180. IEEE Computer Society. tum Algorithms. In *Proceedings of the 16th Interna-* Goemans, M. X. and Williamson, D. P. (1995). Improved *tional Conference on Pervasive Patterns and Applica-* approximation algorithms for maximum cut and sat- *tions (PATTERNS 2024)*, pages 25–31. Xpert Publish- isfiability problems using semidefinite programming. ing Services (XPS). *Journal of the ACM (JACM)*, 42(6):1115–1145. Truger, F., Beisel, M., Barzen, J., Leymann, F., and Yus- Harrigan, M. P., Sung, K. J., Neeley, M., Satzinger, K. J., supov, V. (2022). Selection and Optimization of Hy- Arute, F., Arya, K., Atalaya, J., Bardin, J. C., Barends, perparameters in Warm-Started Quantum Optimiza- R., Boixo, S., Broughton, M., Buckley, B. B., Buell, tion for the MaxCut Problem. *Electronics*, 11(7). D. A., Burkett, B., Bushnell, N., Chen, Y., Chen, Z., Wang, S., Fontana, E., Cerezo, M., Sharma, K., Sone, A., Chiaro, B., Collins, R., Courtney, W., Demura, S., Cincio, L., and Coles, P. J. (2021). Noise-induced bar- Dunsworth, A., Eppens, D., Fowler, A., Foxen, B., ren plateaus in variational quantum algorithms. *Na-* Gidney, C., Giustina, M., Graff, R., Habegger, S., Ho, *ture Communications*, 12(1). A., Hong, S., Huang, T., Ioffe, L. B., Isakov, S. V., Zhang, Y., Mu, X., Liu, X., Wang, X., Zhang, X., Li, K., Jeffrey, E., Jiang, Z., Jones, C., Kafri, D., Kechedzhi, Wu, T., Zhao, D., and Dong, C. (2022). Applying the K., Kelly, J., Kim, S., Klimov, P. V., Korotkov, A. N., quantum approximate optimization algorithm to the Kostritsa, F., Landhuis, D., Laptev, P., Lindmark, M., minimum vertex cover problem. *Applied Soft Com-* Leib, M., Martin, O., Martinis, J. M., McClean, J. R., *puting*, 118:108554. McEwen, M., Megrant, A., Mi, X., Mohseni, M., Mruczkiewicz, W., Mutus, J., Naaman, O., Neill, C., Neukart, F., Niu, M. Y., O’Brien, T. E., O’Gorman, B., Ostby, E., Petukhov, A., Putterman, H., Quintana, C., Roushan, P., Rubin, N. C., Sank, D., Skolik, A., Smelyanskiy, V., Strain, D., Streif, M., Szalay, M., Vainsencher, A., White, T., Yao, Z. J., Yeh, P., Zal- cman, A., Zhou, L., Neven, H., Bacon, D., Lucero, E., Farhi, E., and Babbush, R. (2021). Quantum approx- imate optimization of non-planar graph problems on a planar superconducting processor. *Nature Physics*, 17(3):332–336. Leymann, F. and Barzen, J. (2020). The bitter truth about gate-based quantum algorithms in the NISQ era. *Quantum Science and Technology*, 5(4):044007. Obst, J. and Truger, F. (2024). Parameter Transfer WS-QAOA GitHub Repository. https://github.com/ UST-QuAntiL/Parameter-Transfer-WS-QAOA. Preskill, J. (2018). Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond. *Quantum*, 2:79. Ruan, Y., Marsh, S., Xue, X., Liu, Z., and Wang, J. (2020). The Quantum Approximate Algorithm for Solving Traveling Salesman Problem. *Computers, Materials & Continua*, 63(3):1237–1247. Shaydulin, R., Lotshaw, P. C., Larson, J., Ostrowski, J., and Humble, T. S. (2023). Parameter Transfer for Quan- tum Approximate Optimization of Weighted Max- Cut. *ACM Transactions on Quantum Computing*, 4(3):1–15. Shaydulin, R., Marwaha, K., Wurtz, J., and Lotshaw, P. C. (2021). QAOAKit: A Toolkit for Reproducible Study, Application, and Verification of the QAOA. In *2021 IEEE/ACM 2nd International Workshop on Quantum Computing Software (QCS)*, pages 64–71. Tate, R., Farhadi, M., Herold, C., Mohler, G., and Gupta, S. (2023). Bridging classical and quantum with SDP initialized warm-starts for QAOA. *ACM Transactions on Quantum Computing*, 4(2):1–39. Truger, F., Barzen, J., Bechtold, M., Beisel, M., Ley- mann, F., Mandl, A., and Yussupov, V. (2024a). 48
