# 2409.09012v1

## The Better Solution Probability Metric: Optimizing

## QAOA to Outperform its Warm-Start Solution

Sean Feeney Reuben Tate Stephan Eidenbenz *CCS-3 Information Sciences CCS-3 Information Sciences CCS-3 Information Sciences Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos National Laboratory Los Alamos National Laboratory* Los Alamos, NM, 87544 USA Los Alamos, NM, 87544 USA Los Alamos, NM, 87544 USA sfeeney@lanl.gov rtate@lanl.gov eidenben@lanl.gov

### arXiv:2409.09012v1  [quant-ph]  13 Sep 2024

have been developed and researched heavily upon over the last ***Abstract*****—This paper presents a numerical simulation investi- gation of the Warm-Start Quantum Approximate Optimization** decade. [10] **Algorithm (QAOA) as proposed by Tate et al. [1], focusing** Theoretical guarantees for QAOA are often difficult to come **on its application to 3-regular Max-Cut problems. Our study** by; current results only provide results for extremely low- **demonstrates that Warm-Start QAOA consistently outperforms** depths and/or specific graph families (e.g. Farhi’s 0.6924- **theoretical lower bounds on approximation ratios across various** approximation for 3-regular graphs at circuit depth *p* = 1 [9]). **tilt angles, highlighting its potential in practical scenarios beyond worst-case predictions. Despite these improvements, Warm-Start** Meanwhile, theoretical negative results [11]–[15] suggest that **QAOA with traditional parameters optimized for expectation** the QAOA algorithm may need to be modified if one hopes **value does not exceed the performance of the initial classical** to observe any kind of quantum advantage, especially in the **solution. To address this, we introduce an alternative parameter** current regime of quantum devices where deep circuit depths **optimization objective, the Better Solution Probability (BSP) metric. Our results show that BSP-optimized Warm-Start QAOA** are infeasible to work with due to the compounding effects of **identifies solutions at non-trivial tilt angles that are better than** quantum noise. **even the best classically found warm-start solutions with non-** One promising modification of QAOA is known as Warm- **vanishing probabilities. These findings underscore the importance** Start QAOA where the initial quantum state is modified from **of both theoretical and empirical analyses in refining QAOA and* |*+*⟩⊗n* (the all-equal superposition of bitstrings) to an alternate **exploring its potential for quantum advantage.** starting state, typically one that is designed to be biased ***Index Terms*****—Warm-Start, QAOA, Max-Cut** towards better solutions. While various Warm-Start approaches have been considered [1], [16]–[19], this work focuses on I. INTRODUCTION the approach that Tate et al. [1] developed in 2024, which is The forefront of the field of quantum algorithms is fo- the first Warm-Start approach with known theoretical worst- cused on the achievement of quantum advantage with modern case guarantees at depth *p* = 1. Given a tilt angle parameter quantum devices [2], [3], [4]. Within the past decade, there *θ* and a bitstring *b* (which corresponds to some cut) that is have been demonstrations that claim quantum advantage or locally optimal up to single bitflips, Tate et al. [1] construct supremacy, e.g., by generating distributions obtained by ran- an initial warm-start state *|bθ⟩*which becomes increasingly domized quantum circuits; since then, there has been a shift biased towards *|b⟩*as *θ →*0; the approach is equivalent to standard QAOA at *θ* = 90*◦*. Tate et al. [1] also alter the towards demonstrating quantum advantage for more practical problems. Particular problems of interest that could provide mixing Hamiltonian in a way that allows QAOA to still be significant value to both scientific advancements and commer- viewed as a Trotterization of Quantum Adiabatic Computing. cialization of the field as a whole are optimization problems For various values of *θ*, Tate et al. [1] numerically calculate [5]. This paper focuses on a sub division of problems known theoretical lower bounds on the worst-case approximation as combinatorial optimizaiton problems; this class of problems ratios for single-round (*p* = 1) Warm-Start QAOA on 3-regular includes famous examples such as the Traveling Salesman Max-Cut instances. Problem, Max-Cut, Minimum Spanning Tree, among many Overall, the theoretical results by Tate et al. [1] paint a others. These problems have applications in logistics [6], VLSI grim picture for Warm-Start QAOA. However, it is often [7], power systems [8], and beyond. Of particular interest in the situation that worst-case guarantees are not representative this paper are quantum algorithms with provable approxima- of the behavior of algorithms on more “typical” instances; tion ratio guarantees on combinatorial optimization problems for example, the simplex method for solving problems in such as Max-Cut. One such algorithm proposed for solving linear programming is known to run in exponential time in these types of combinatorial optimization problems is the the worst case but is incredibly efficient in practice [20]. Quantum Approximation Optimization Algorithm, (QAOA), Thus, it may still be possible that Warm-Start QAOA has put forward by Farhi et al. in 2014 [9]. It is part of the a *practical* advantage; this motivates our work which serves hybrid classical-quantum variational algorithms schemes that as an experimental exploration of Tate et al.’s [1] warm-start

approach. yielded good empirical results, they found that such a warm- In this work we contribute three main findings: start technique was difficult to theoretically analyze beyond *p* = 0 (i.e. simply measuring the warm-start state).
1. First, we find that single-round Warm-Start QAOA

Recent work by Tate et al. [1] considered warm-starts on randomly generated 3-regular instances *significantly* similar to Egger et al.’s Rounded Warm-Start QAOA approach outperforms the theoretical lower bounds obtained by but with aligned mixers and with alternative methods for ob- Tate et al. [1], with the empirical results consistently taining a classical solution (to later use to construct the warm- achieving a higher averaged approximation ratio for any start) on 3-regular Max-Cut instances. As stated earlier in the choice of tilt angle *θ*. introduction, this line of work [1] was primarily theoretical in
1. Second, we show that, regardless of the parameter-

nature and this work serves as a experimental exploration of finding scheme used, for all graphs *G* and for all initial this specific Warm-Start QAOA approach; we provide more bitstrings *b* tested, there does not exist a tilt angle details regarding this recent work by Tate et al. [1] in Section *θ ∈{*1*◦,* 2*◦, . . . ,* 90*◦}* for which Warm-Start QAOA III-D. produces an approximation ratio greater than what is Lastly, we note that our BSP novel metric, discussed earlier achieved by the initial classical cut corresponding to *b*. in the introduction, bears some similarity to the Threshold-
1. Lastly, we propose a novel figure-of-merit which we

Based QAOA [23] introduced by Golden et al. which considers call *Better Solution Probability* (BSP). For BSP, we solutions above some specificed threshold value; we discuss simply change the objective function of the QAOA the differences between QAOA with BSP optimization and parameter finding step from maximizing expectation Threshold-Based QAOA in more detail in Section VII. value to maximizing the probability of finding a solution that is better than the initially provided warm-start. We III. BACKGROUND empirically show that, with the BSP metric, Warm- *A. QAOA* Start QAOA frequently performs best at non-trivial tilt angles 0*◦< θ <* 90*◦*, beating both the classical cut The Quantum Approximation Optimization Algorithm (*θ* = 0*◦*) and standard QAOA (*θ* = 90*◦*). BSP-QAOA (QAOA) was developed as a method to provide approximate solutions to combinatorial optimization problems [9]. Com- reliably finds better solutions with a small, but non- binatorial optimization problems are frequently given over vanishing probability. Moreover, we show that the BSP binary inputs *x ∈{*0*,* 1*}n*, where *f* : *{*0*,* 1*}n →*R is an metric is practical in the sense that it is possible to objective function that evaluates the cost of solution *x*. The optimize the circuit parameters for this metric (unlike goal is to maximize or minimize the function *f*(*x*) to achieve other metrics such as ground state probability which an approximate solution and prepare a state *|ψ⟩*that one can requires knowledge of the optimal solution ahead of sample high quality solutions from. The QAOA is comprised time). of four main components: II. RELATED WORK *•* A cost Hamiltonian *Hc*, diagonal in the computational Various warm-start techniques for QAOA have been intro- basis: *Hc |x⟩*= *f*(*x*) *|x⟩*, referred to as a phase separator duced. The first Warm-Start QAOA variants were proposed *•* A mixing Hamiltonian *Hm* by Egger et al. [16] which refer to as *Continuous Warm-start •* An integer *p ≥*1 to represent the number of layers in the *QAOA* and *Rounded Warm-Start QAOA*. Their Continuous QAOA circuit *•* Two real arrays of circuit parameters1 *β* = *{β*1*, . . . βp}*, Warm-Start QAOA uses the relaxation of a QUBO (Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization); however, it should be *γ* = *{γ*1*, . . . γp}*, of which the application of both *Hc* noted that their QUBO relaxation is only convex (i.e. easily and *Hm* are dependent upon solvable) under certain circumstances (which do not hold *•* An initial state *|s*0*⟩* for Max-Cut). Their Rounded Warm-Start QAOA approach In the context of standard Max-Cut QAOA with graph *G* = is similar to the approach in this work in that a *particular* (*V, E*) and edge weights *w* : *E →*R, the Hamiltonians and solution and a tilt angle *θ* is used to create the initial warm- the initial state are given by: start quantum state; however, they instead primarily focused on *Hc* = 1 X *wij*(*−σz j σz* an unconventional unaligned mixer. At *θ* = *π/*3, for Max-Cut, *k* + 1)*,* (1) 2 this unaligned mixer (with suitable circuit parameters) is able (*i,j*)*∈E* to recover the classical solution used to create the warm-start; *n* however, unlike aligned mixers (defined in Section III-D), this X *σx Hm* = *i ,* (2) approach has no convergence guarantees as *p →∞*. *i* Independently from Egger et al. [16], Tate et al. had de- *|s*0*⟩*= *|*+*⟩⊗n* = 1 X *|z⟩,* (3) veloped an alternative warms-start technique based on Burer- 2*n* Monteiro (BM) [21] and Goemans-Williamson (GW) [22] *z* relaxations of the Max-Cut problem; they considered the Pauli- 1Much of the QAOA literature refer to the *γ* and *β* parameters as “angles”; *X* mixer in their first paper [17] and improved aligned mixers however, we avoid this terminology in order to avoid potential confusion with in a follow-up paper [18]. While such GW-based warm-starts the tilt angle *θ* used in Warm-Start QAOA. 2

where *σx, σy, σz* are the standard Pauli operators. Equation by solving a semidefinite program (SDP) relaxation and then 2 is often referred to as the Pauli-*X* mixer. The initial state performing a randomized hyperplane-rounding procedure on *|s*0*⟩*is the uniform superposition over the computational basis the SDP solution. states measured in the *z* basis. In the context of Max-Cut, all Recall that the theoretical lower bounds by Tate et al. [1] 2*n* possible cuts have the same probability of being observed require that the initial cut used is a LO cut; however, cuts when measuring *|s*0*⟩*= *|*+*⟩⊗n* in the *z* basis. obtained by the GW algorithm may not necessarily be LO cuts. The QAOA circuit is constructed by starting with *|s*0*⟩*and For this reason, for any cut obtained by the GW algorithm, iteratively applying unitaries corresponding to *HB* and *HC* in we perform the same local search described earlier (using the an alternating fashion for *p* rounds: cut returned by the GW algorithm as a starting point) until we obtain a locally optimal cut. We will use the term *GW local |γ, β⟩*= *e−iβpHme−iγpHc . . . e−iβ*1*Hme−iγ*1*Hc |s*0*⟩.* (4) *search cuts* to refer to cuts obtained by this overall procedure. Each cost unitary *e−iγjHC* applies a phase to each basis state *|x⟩*(with *x ∈{*0*,* 1*}n*) that is proportional to the classical *C. Approximation Ratio* objective value *f*(*x*). Each mixing unitary *e−iβjHB* applies a Given a bitstring *b* corresponding to a cut in a graph *G*, single-qubit rotation about the *x*-axis of the Bloch sphere to the approximation ratio associated with *G* and *b* is defined as every qubit (with the rotation angle determined by *βj*). QAOA, cut(*b*)*/*Max-Cut(*G*). Given a graph *G* and some output state as a hybrid quantum classical routine, relies on a classical *|ψ⟩*of some quantum circuit, we define the approximation optimizer to tune the circuit parameters *β, γ* maximizing the ratio associated with *G* and *|ψ⟩*as *⟨ψ| HC |ψ⟩/*Max-Cut(*G*) expectation value *⟨γ, β| Hc |γ, β⟩*. where *HC* is the Max-Cut cost hamiltonian for *G*. *B. Classical Max-Cut* The Max-Cut problem is as follows: given a graph *G* = *D. Warm-Start QAOA* (*V, E*) and edge weights *w* : *E →*R, partition the vertex set As in Tate et al. [1], we consider warm-starts of the form *V* into two disjoint groups so that the sum of the weights of the *|s*0*⟩*= *|bθ⟩*where *b* is a classically obtained bitstring and edges between the groups is maximized. If *|V |* = *n*, a feasible *θ ∈*[0*, π*] is a parameter referred to as the tilt angle. In the solution can be represented as a bitstring *b ∈{*0*,* 1*}n* where context of Max-Cut QAOA, we refer to *b* as the initial (warm- the value of *j*th bit corresponds to one of the two possible start) cut. Geometrically, *|bθ⟩*is a product-state where the *j*th parts of the partition. Algebraically, the Max-Cut problem is qubit is at an angle *θ* away from either the north or south pole equivalent to the following maximization problem: of the Bloch sphere depending on the value of *bj* (the *j*th bit Max-Cut(*G*) = *b∈{*0*,*1*}n* cut(*b*)*,* max of *b*). Additionally, just as in [1], we adapt the QAOA mixing cut(*b*) = 1 Hamiltonian *Hm* so that it is *aligned* with the warm-start *|bθ⟩*, X *wij ·* **1**[*bi̸* = *bj*]*.* 2 i.e., *|bθ⟩*is a ground state of *Hm*; this ensures (due to QAOA’s (*i,j*)*∈E* connection to the adiabatic theorem [9]) that as *p →∞*, that We say that a bitstring *b* is locally optimal2 (LO) if cut(*b*) *≥* an optimal cut is sampled with probability approaching 1. cut(*b*(*j*)) for all *j ∈*[*n*], where *b*(*j*) denotes the bitstring *b* with Geometrically, these aligned mixers correspond to single-qubit the *j*th bit flipped; such cuts have the property that moving a rotations about each qubit’s original Bloch sphere position in single vertex to the other side of the cut cannot improve the cut *|bθ⟩*. value. For unweighted 3-regular graphs, the theoretical lower A visualization of the warm-start state *|bθ⟩*and the action bounds on the approximation ratio by Tate et al. [1] assume of the corresponding aligned mixer *Hm* can be seen in Figure that the initial cut *b* for Warm-Start QAOA is an LO cut. In this
1. We refer the reader to Tate et al. [1] for further details

work, we obtain LO cuts by starting with a random bitstring regarding the construction and implementation of the warm- (chosen uniformly at random) and iteratively flipping bits to start state and mixer. improve the cut value until it is no longer possible to do. It is For various values of *θ ∈*[0*, π*], Tate et al. [1] deter- straightforward to show that for (unweighted) 3-regular graphs, mine lower bounds on the worst-case approximation ratio for algorithms that produce LO cuts have an approximation ratio single-round Warm-Start QAOA on 3-regular graphs under the of 2*/*3, see [1] for a proof. assumption that the initial cut is an LO cut. More specifi- The best known algorithm with provable approximation- cally, for each *θ*, they numerically determine the optimal (*θ*- ratio guarantees is the Goemans-Williamson (GW) algorithm dependent) choice of *γ, β* so that the bound on the worst- [22] which is a randomized classical algorithm with a worst- case approximation ratio (with a fixed choice of *γ* and *β*) is case approximation ratio of 0.878 (in expectation) for graphs as best as possible. The values of these lower bounds and with non-negative edge weights. The GW algorithm works optimal circuit parameters can be found in Table 2 in Tate et al.’s work [1]. We will refer to these bounds and angles as 2We will later also consider local *continuous* optimization of the circuit *Tate’s theoretical lower bounds* and *Tate’s theoretical circuit* parameters. While it should be clear from context what is meant, the reader *parameters* respectively. should be careful not to conflate these concepts with one another. 3

basin-hopping) are compared against Tate’s theoretical bounds *|*0*⟩* (see Section III-D); the approximation ratios for the simula- tions are averaged over all graph-bitstring pairs for each *n*. Figures 2a and 2b show approximation ratio achieved on the vertical axis for different values of the warm-start tilt angle (*θ*) *z |*0*θ⟩ θ* on the horizontal axis. Figure 2a shows the results of the basin- hopping parameter optimization scheme for #*b* randomly *x y* generated bitstrings, which are then locally optimized. Figure 2b shows the results for the same basin-hopping parameter optimization scheme, except the #*b* bitstrings are generated using the GW algorithm hyperplane rounding procedure fol- *θ |*1*θ⟩* lowed by a local search on the bitstrings produced from the GW algorithm (Section II-B). Figure 2c and 2d show the corresponding scaling of the averaged approximation ratio (y- *|*1*⟩* axis) as the problem size *n ∈*[4*,* 28] (x-axis) increases for Fig. 1: The states *|*0*θ⟩*and *|*1*θ⟩*geometrically depicted on several tilt angles (*θ*). the Bloch sphere. The green half-circle, **Arc**, in the *xz*-plane To understand these plots better we note that, at *θ* = 0*◦*, the denotes all the possible positions for *|*0*θ⟩*and *|*1*θ⟩*as *θ* varies results of the single-round Warm-Start QAOA are by definition from 0 to *π*. equivalent to the classically obtained warm-start cut value (since neither phase separator nor mixer have any effect on the state at *θ* = 0*◦*as they aim to rotate around the *Z*-axis), IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP whereas the performance at *θ* = 90*◦*is identical to the single- round standard QAOA with the Pauli-*X* mixer. Thus, in order For each *n* = 4*,* 6*,* 8*, . . . ,* 28, we randomly generate #*G*(*n*) for Warm-Start QAOA to outperform both its classical starting *n*-node 3-regular graphs using the Julia language’s Graphs state and the standard QAOA variation, these plots would need library. For each graph *G*, we randomly generate #*b*(*n*) LO to show a maximum at some *θ* other than at 0*◦*or 90*◦*. bitstrings (as described in Section III-B) to be used as initial Comparing the approximation ratios for the basin-hopping cuts for the Warm-Start QAOA algorithm. For each *n*, this and Tate’s theoretical lower bounds for *θ ∈{*0*◦,* 90*◦}* in yields a total of #*G*(*n*) *·* #*b*(*n*) graph-bitstring (*G, b*) pairs Figures 2a and 2b, it is seen that the numerical results show, where #*G*(*n*)*,* #*b*(*n*) are functions of *n* as seen in Equation 5 in practice, a strong improvement of this Warm-Start QAOA below. Due to computational limitations, we consider a smaller over Tate’s worst case theoretical lower bounds. The upward number of such pairs for higher *n*. slope to the peak for *θ* = 60*◦*, was anticipated from Tate’s theoretical work, and can be seen in the orange lower bounds  #*G* = 30*,* #*b* = 10*,* if 4 *≤n ≤*18 (*G, b*) pairs curve, though in a less pronounced fashion. This is due to the   on *n*-vertex : #*G* = 10*,* #*b* = 10*,* if 20 *≤n ≤*24 fact that for *k*-regular graphs with odd *k*, there exists circuit graphs  #*G* = 6*,* #*b* = 3*,* if 26 *≤n ≤*28 parameters *γ* and *β* that allow Warm-Start QAOA to exactly 
1. For each (*G, b*) pair, we simulate the Warm-Start QAOA

recover the initial cut at *θ* = 60*◦*[1]. In Figures 2c and 2d we can see the basin-hopping param- on graph *G* with warm-start *|bθ⟩*for all values of tilt angle eter optimization scaling of the problem size *n* compared to *θ* = 0*◦,* 1*◦, . . . ,* 90*◦*for circuit depth *p* = 1; at *n* = 28 the averaged approximation ratio for both LO warm-starts and GW tilt angle *θ* is instead calculated in 5*◦*increments due to com- LO warm-starts, ranging from *n* = 4 to *n* = 28. The horizontal putational limitations. The QAOA simulations are performed red-dashed lines show the provable approximation ratio guar- with JuliQAOA [25], a software library written in Julia for antees for Max-Cut on 3-regular graphs for QAOA at depth simulating QAOA circuits. *p* = 1 and the best known algorithm for cubic graphs [24]. The This work considers a variety of parameter optimization purple curve shows the scaling of the average approximation schemes and a variety of performance metrics which will be achieved with tilt angle *θ* = 0*◦*, i.e. the classically optimized discussed in more detail throughout the remainder of the paper. cut. The yellow curve shows tilt angle *θ* = 90*◦*, which, as Unless otherwise stated, all problem sizes *n* plotted in the previously discussed, represents the standard QAOA baseline. figures are averaged over all graph-bitstring pairs in Equation The two other curves, blue and green, represent tilt angles 5. *θ* = 45*◦*and *θ* = 60*◦*. These were chosen as representations for the behavior seen in Figures 2a and 2b. V. PARAMETER OPTIMIZATION Initially, as expected from Tate’s lower bounds, the per- We first consider Warm-Start QAOA with a simple param- formance of the Warm-Start QAOA deteriorates. However, as eter optimization scheme: the default basin-hopping optimizer the tilt angle approaches 60*◦*the classical state is nearly, or in JuliQAOA. In Figures 2a and 2b, for *n* = 10*,* 16*,* 22*,* 28, even sometimes recovered with the basin-hopping optimization the average approximation ratios of Warm-Start QAOA (with procedure. The scaling nature of Warm-Start QAOA appears 4

(a) Average approximation ratio for basin-hopping circuit parameter (b) Average approximation ratio for basin-hopping circuit parameter optimization with **Local Search** warm-start state. optimization with **Goemans-Williamson Local Search** warm-start state. (c) Average approximation ratio vs problem size *n* basin-hopping (d) Average approximation ratio vs problem size *n* basin-hopping circuit parameter optimization with **Local Search** warm-start state circuit parameter optimization with **Goemans-Williamson Local** for *θ* = 0*◦,* 45*◦,* 60*◦,* 90*◦*tilt angles. Red dashed lines represent the **Search** warm-start state for *θ* = 0*◦,* 45*◦,* 60*◦,* 90*◦*tilt angles. Red best known 3-Regular Max-Cut approximation ratio [24] and Farhi’s dashed lines represent the best known 3-Regular Max-Cut approxima- QAOA 3-Regular Max-Cut approximation ratio guarantee for circuit tion ratio [24] and Farhi’s QAOA 3-Regular Max-Cut approximation depth *p* = 1. ratio guarantee for circuit depth *p* = 1. Fig. 2 to flatten out for both plots. While further experiments would same LO bitstring used to build the Warm-Start QAOA (the ideally be conducted for larger problem sizes, we quickly run graph instance runs on 3 identical LO bitstrings). into computational limits of current HPC systems, particularly For the same tilt angle *θ* with identical LO bitstring for considering that we need to average these calculations over this 3-regular graph instance, the basin-hopping parameter many instances. Figures 2c and 2d seem to suggests some type optimization appears to struggle at times to find the optimal of asymptotic behavior arising at higher *n* for this Warm-Start values of *β* and *γ* respectively. In some cases it recovers the QAOA, which we take as numerical evidence (partiularly for classical starting state, while other times it does substantially the Goemans-Williamson case in Figure 2d) that we are indeed worse (this basin-hopping behavior is expected and discussed seeing the asymptotic behavior of Warm-Start QAOA. further in Section VI). Furthermore, even when basin-hopping Overall, the basin-hopping curves in Figures 2a and 2b finds what appears to be an optimal set of parameters, it appear quite smooth, but it is apparent that the jaggedness only ever recovers the classical starting cut. This implies that implies there are many problem instances where basin-hopping when using a relatively straight-forward implementation of simply fails to find an optimal *β* and *γ*. This can be visu- Warm-Start QAOA, it does not yield approximation ratios ally observed when looking deeper into a specific problem that outperform the initial classical cut. In fact, there were no instance, as seen in Figure 3. The green curve in Figure 3 plots graph-bitstring pairs that the Warm-Start QAOA, with basin- a randomly generated 3-regular graph instance for *n* = 22, hopping parameter initialization and optimization, for which where 3 of the randomly generated bitstrings converge to the it found an approximation ratio greater than the classical cut 5

Fig. 3: Approximation ratio for a single instance of a randomly Fig. 4: Average approximation ratio achieved with basin- generated 3-regular graph, where 3 of the randomly generated hopping (red curve) vs numerical results for Tate’s lower bitstrings converge to the same locally optimized bitstring. bounds with no further optimizations (green curve), and after local maximum optimization (blue curve) for each tilt angle *θ*. used to build the Warm-Start QAOA. To avoid this, at times, sporadic difference in approxi- Figure 4 highlights several key observations. First and mation ratio, we move our focus to other circuit parameter foremost, it is evident that the blue curve, representing the initialization schemes. In order to improve Warm-Start QAOA approximation ratio after conducting a local maximum op- performance, we focus on finding better ways to initialize and timization on Tate’s theoretical circuit parameters, is often optimize the *β* and *γ* angles beyond basin-hopping. significantly above the green curve, which corresponds to the As can be seen from the plots in Figure 2, both the GW averaged approximation ratio using Tate’s theoretical circuit algorithm with LO bitstrings and the LO bitstring warm- parameters without further optimization. This suggests that the starts produce similar behavior. Due to this fact we focus our local maximum search effectively enhances the performance attention on the randomly generated LO bitstring warm-starts of the Warm-Start QAOA, yielding better parameter settings to avoid redundant plots moving forward. Additionally, to than the initial theoretical *β* and *γ* provided by Tate’s lower maintain consistency in relation to the divergence pronounced bounds. in Figure 3, we maintain a problem size of *n* = 22 for fair = 60*◦*is particularly insightful. The behavior near *θ* comparison in Figures 4 and 5. The blue curve remains above the red curve and appears far smoother, further indicating, as mentioned previously, VI. IMPROVING WARM-START PARAMETER that basin-hopping struggles at times to find the optimal INITIALIZATION AND OPTIMIZATION angles. This is evidenced by the red line’s performance, which occasionally lags behind, particularly around *θ* = 60*◦*for Figure 2 shows that a relatively straight-forward implemen- tation of Warm-Start QAOA does not yield approximation reason observed in Figure 3 in the previous section. Despite ratios that outperform the initial classical cut. In order to this improvement, the fact that the red basin-hopping curve improve Warm-Start QAOA performance, we focus on finding sometimes exceeds the blue line, especially for *θ >* 63*◦*, better ways to initialize and optimize the *β* and *γ* circuit indicates that even with the enhanced scheme, we are not parameters beyond basin-hopping. Instead of basin-hopping consistently finding the optimal angles. This observation is parameter initialization and optimization for the numerical corroborated by the discontinuities in the blue line around simulations, we use the *β*’s and *γ*’s from Tate’s lower bounds *θ* = 52*◦*and *θ* = 63*◦*, suggesting that the current optimization to initialize the Warm-Start QAOA for each tilt angle *θ*. approach may be insufficient. Additionally, we subsequently run a local maximum search These findings lead us to conclude that while initializing the of the landscape to see if there exists *β*’s and *γ*’s that further Warm-Start QAOA with Tate’s theoretical circuit parameters, improve the approximation ratio beyond the initial *β* and *γ*, and additionally using local maximum optimization, provides in hopes of obtaining a cut greater than the classical cut a noticeable improvement over the basin-hopping method on used to build the warm-start. Figure 4 shows the average average, it is not a foolproof solution. The inconsistencies approximation ratio achieved for problem size *n* = 22 using observed across different tilt angle *θ* regimes suggests that a Tate’s theoretical circuit parameters without further optimiza- more sophisticated and nuanced initialization and optimization tion (green curve) and with local maximum optimization (blue scheme is necessary. curve). The red curve is the basin-hopping implementation as Tate et al. [1] observed that for varying values of tilt-angle *θ*, described previously in Section V. that the theoretical optimal circuit parameters (corresponding 6

(a) Average approximation ratio achieved with circuit parameter **region** (b) Average approximation ratio achieved with circuit parameter **1**: *β* = 0*.*486 *γ* = 0*.*5634. **region 2**: *β* = 1*.*5705 *γ* = 3*.*142. (c) Average approximation ratio achieved with circuit parameter (d) Average approximation ratio achieved with basin-hopping (red **region 3**: *β* = 0*.*3996 *γ* = 2*.*5144. curve), combined Tate’s parameter regions without optimization (blue curve) and after local maximum optimization (green curve). The two regions that dominate after local maximum optimization (green curve) are angle region 1 from 1 *≤θ ≤*51 and angle region 2 with 52 *≤ θ ≤*89. Angle region 3 does not converge to a better local maximum than either regions 1 or 2. Fig. 5 to their theoretical lower bounds) were clustered into three standable. It appears the discrepancy in approximation ratio groups (see Figure 17 of [1] with *κ* = 2*/*3). To further improve can be explained by the basin-hopping scheme finding a local upon the discontinuities in Figure 4 we consider three (*γ, β*) optimum associated with one of Tate’s 3 circuit parameter pairs that are representative of the three regions described regions. At times the *β* and *γ* found by basin-hopping finds by Tate et. al [1]. We then run numerical simulations with expectation values associated the circuit parameters in region *β*’s and *γ*’s from each of these three regions; we present 1, while at other times it finds expectation values associated the results for *n* = 22 in Figures 5a, 5b, and 5c. The blue with circuit parameter regions 2 or 3. Moreover, as seen curve shown is the average approximation ratio achieved with in Figures 5a, 5b, and 5c, these regions themselves can be Tate’s initial circuit parameters *β* and *γ*, prior to a local optimized further, thus leading to the inconsistent performance maximum optimization, shown by the green curve. We then of the basin-hopping technique observed in Figure 3. draw upon the best average approximation values from the The technique of selecting a *β* and *γ* from each of the 3 three separate regions and combine them further into Figure circuit parameter regions found by Tate et al. [1] produces fluid 5d, plotted against the average approximation ratio achieved curves and shows the importance of theory as a foundation with the basin-hopping technique in red. for experimental simulations in Warm-Start QAOA research. When comparing the plots in Figure 5 to the graph instance In addition, it is observed that local maximum optimization with multiple identical LO bitstrings in Figure 3, the sporadic techniques are extremely useful in improving performance behavior associated with basin-hopping becomes more under- of the Warm-Start QAOA circuit parameters *β* and *γ*. The 7

green curve in Figure 5 shows an overall improvement over Figure 6a, compares the averaged BSP for problem sizes basin-hopping across the approximation ratio averages. It of *n* = 16 to *n* = 28. We find for Tates’s *β* = 0*.*486 also appears that the optimal circuit parameters are found, and *γ* = 0*.*5634 region 1 circuit parameters, that there are instances where there exists non-trivial tilt angles *θ* at which however, for all graph-bitstring pairs, this warm-start still fails to produce a higher approximation ratio greater than that of the Warm-Start QAOA algorithm can sample larger cuts or the classical starting state. The classical cut is recovered, but better solutions with a higher probability on average than standard QAOA at *θ* = 90*◦*. We note that at *θ* = 0*◦*BSP a better solution is never found. will be 0*.*0 for reasons previously mentioned in section V. VII. A NOVEL METRIC: OPTIMIZING FOR BETTER As can be seen in Figure 6a, the BSP advantage of Warm- SOLUTION PROBABILITIES Start QAOA appears to become more pronounced as problem size *n* increases. The most drastic BSP advantages for the Our results thus far paint a bleak picture for single-round Warm-Start QAOA are seen for *n ≥*20. The peak for *n* = 20 Warm-Start QAOA: the classical starting cut is better than or occurs at the tilt angle *θ* = 75*◦*and at *θ* = 65*◦*for *n* = 28 equal to the the expected cut size found. While the expected respectively. It is important to state that while there are many approximation ratio is the standard metric in the QAOA liter- graph-bitstring pairs where the Warm-Start QAOA approach ature, the probability of sampling an optimum solution, often has a higher BSP for problem sizes *n ≤*18 than standard referred to as ground state probability (GSP), is sometimes QAOA (*θ* = 90*◦*), this was not the average case until higher used. Appendix X-A Figure 8 shows the ground state sampling *n* as it appeared for *n ≥*20. probabilities achieved with basin-hopping optimized for the The results and insight observed from Figure 6a, inspires standard expectation value. While we see similar behavior a shift in our optimization approach with respect to BSP as to that of the approximation ratio, we note that Warm-Start a metric. Rather than using the standard QAOA objective QAOA does not outperform the GSP of the initial classical cut function, which maximizes circuit parameters *β* and *γ* for ex- (i.e., the value at *θ* = 0 or the likeliehood that the optimium pectation value, we instead create a new objective function to solution is found by the classical algorithm) for any other tilt maximize the circuit parameters for BSP. By doing so, we aim angle *θ*. Additionally, we remark that, in practice, optimizing to exploit the unique strengths of Warm-Start QAOA, where the circuit parameters for GSP cannot be realistically done the probability of finding a better solution than the initial since optimizing for GSP requires knowledge of the optimal classical solution can be enhanced. We note that the circuit solution a priori. parameter regions found by Tate et al. [1] were discovered Due to this fact of GSP requiring knowledge a priori of under the assumption of an objective function optimizing for the optimal solution, we consider other metrics by which to expectation value. analyze the Warm-Start QAOA. In order to change our frame Figure 6b shows the averaged BSP achieved for problem of reference, we look further into the statevector probabilities size *n* = 20 with an objective function optimizing for BSP, for cuts whose value is greater than the value of the initial using several different optimization techniques previously dis- cut used to build the Warm-Start QAOA. We define Better cussed in this paper. Due to the novel nature of the metric, Solution Probability (BSP) formally in Equations 6 and 7 basin-hopping required substantially more steps to find greater If values of BSP than when optimized for expectation value. For X *|ψ⟩*= *cx |x⟩* (6) these reasons *n* = 20 was the largest problem size for which *x∈{*0*,*1*}n* we were able to receive data under computational constraints. is the output of Warm-Start QAOA with initial solution *b*, then, The green curve represents the average BSP achieved only using *β* and *γ* from Tate’s region 1 circuit parameters. The X *|cx|*2*.* BSP = (7) red curve represents the average BSP achieved using the basin- *x∈{*0*,*1*}n*: hopping parameter initialization and optimization scheme. The cut(*x*)*>*cut(*b*) blue and orange curve show the average BSP achieved using Our BSP metric bears some resemblance to the concepts a 40x40 grid search over *β* and *γ*. of Threshold QAOA [23], which considers solutions with A first observation from the curves in Figure 6b is that all approximation ratios above a certain threshold. There are, three optimization techniques, basin-hopping, grid search, and however, noticeable differences. First, in the context of warm- grid search with local max, improve the overall average of starts, the value to beat for BSP is already determined by the BSP, suggesting that BSP, as a novel metric, can successfully be optimized for with respect to circuit parameters *β* and warm-start; whereas for Threshold-based QAOA, the threshold *γ*. Secondly, it appears that grid search with local max itself is a hyper-parameter that needs to be decided. Secondly, while Threshold QAOA gives consideration to cuts or solu- provides the greatest advantage over the other two optimization tions above some threshold, their approach is vastly different, schemes, improving upon the best BSP acheived with Tate’s region 1 circuit parameters by more than 10% from 0*.*0118 to e.g. they optimize circuit parameters for expectation value (i.e. approximation ratio) and approximation ratio is the final 0*.*0131. Additionally, the Warm-Start QAOA BSP advantage ”figure of merit” that is considered. In contrast, in this paper, is maintained as seen from the peak reached at *θ* = 70*◦*for BSP ***is*** the parameter optimization objective. the orange curve. 8

(a) Averaged Better Solution Probability (BSP) vs *θ* achieved using (b) Averaged Better Solution Probability (BSP) vs *θ* using Tate’s Tate’s circuit parameters (CP) from region 1. circuit parameters (CP) from region 1, basin-hopping (**optimized for BSP**), and grid search before and after local max (**optimized for BSP**). (c) Warm-start basin-hopping optimization for BSP (red curve) versus warm-start basin-hopping optimization for expectation value (green curve) vs *θ* Fig. 6 Additionaly, Figure 6c shows the differences achieved when As anticipated, our empirical findings demonstrate that Warm- basin-hopping is used as a parameter optimization technique Start QAOA, even with a simple basin-hopping parameter for BSP (red curve) versus for expectation value (green optimization scheme, significantly outperforms the theoretical curve). As can be observed from the plot, using basin-hopping worst-case lower bounds established by Tate et al. for 3-regular optimized for BSP shows improvement over the BSP achieved Max-Cut instances. This gap between theoretical expectations when using the standard expectation value objective. and practical outcomes underscores the importance of empir- Overall, we observe improvement for BSP sampling capa- ical validation in the study of quantum algorithms. bilities for standard QAOA (*θ* = 90*◦*), indicating its potential However, our investigation also uncovered some limitations usefulness as a generalized metric in the field of QAOA re- of the Warm-Start QAOA approach, particularly at the single- search. While expectation value remains a general benchmark round depth (*p* = 1). Despite the promise of warm-starting for the performance of QAOA, optimizing for our BSP metric from a classically optimized bitstring, our results consistently provides a potentially more powerful way of assessing and showed that the performance of the Warm-Start QAOA did not improving the performance of Warm-Start QAOA, offering a surpass the classical starting cut for any choice of the tilt angle new direction for achieving quantum advantage in combinato- *θ*. This suggests that while Warm-Start QAOA can recover the rial optimization problems. initial classical solution, it does not improve upon it within the constraints of a single round, which raises questions about VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION its practical advantage in a scenario where we are limited to *p* = 1. The results from our experimental study on Warm-Start QAOA reveal a complex landscape of algorithmic performance To address this limitation, we introduced a novel figure-of- that both confirms and challenges existing theoretical insights. merit, the Better Solution Probability (BSP), which measures 9

the probability that Warm-Start QAOA identifies a better a distinct behavior difference between the Pauli-*X* mixer and solution than the initial classical cut. Our results indicate that, the aligned Mixer where the GSP constantly decreases for the under this metric, Warm-Start QAOA frequently performs best X mixer, but spikes, as anticipated for the Aligned Mixer at at non-trivial tilt angles (i.e., 0*◦< θ <* 90*◦*), suggesting that *θ* = 60*◦*. We reiterate, however, that in practice, optimizing there is still untapped potential in this algorithmic variant. the circuit parameters for GSP cannot be realistically done Moreover, the BSP metric proves to be more practical for since optimizing for GSP requires knowledge of the optimal parameter optimization than other metrics like ground state solution a priori. probability, as it does not require prior knowledge of the optimal solution, rather just sampling of the state vector. *A. Future Work* Our study opens up several avenues for future research. One of the most immediate directions is to extend the Warm- Start QAOA to higher circuit depths (*p >* 1). Our current work focuses on single-round QAOA for which Tate et. al had proven theoretical lower bounds. As additional rounds of Warm-Start QAOA are added, the increased circuit depth greatly complicates the optimization landscape for *β* and *γ*, making analytical derivations for theoretical lower bound tilt angles *θ* extremely challenging. However, increasing the circuit depth could potentially unlock more of the algorithm’s theoretical advantages, allowing it to surpass the classical starting solution and standard QAOA more consistently. Fig. 7: Pauli-*X* mixer average ground state probabilities Additionally another direction we would like to explore achieved with LO warm-start and basin-hopping (optimizing is expanding the scope of our experiments beyond the 3- for expectation value). regular Max-Cut problem. Warm-Start QAOA and BSP can be applied to a broader set of combinatorial optimization problems, where the initial state is derived from different classical algorithms tailored to those specific problems. Fur- thermore, exploring other graph families, beyond 3-regular graphs, could provide deeper insights into the algorithm’s generalizability and robustness. These future investigations will be essential for determining the full potential and practical applicability of Warm-Start QAOA and BSP in solving real- world optimization problems. IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy through the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Los Alamos National Laboratory is operated by Triad National Security, LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Administration of U.S. Department of Energy (Contract No. 89233218CNA000001). Fig. 8: Aligned mixer average ground state probabilities The research presented in this article was supported by achieved with LO warm-start and basin-hopping (optimizing the Laboratory Directed Research and Development program for expectation value). of Los Alamos National Laboratory under project number 20230049DR as well as by the NNSA’s Advanced Simulation and Computing Beyond Moore’s Law Program at Los Alamos *B. Aligned Mixer vs Pauli-X Mixer Approximation Ratios* National Laboratory. The differences in numerical results for Warm-Start QAOA X. APPENDIX with the aligned mixer and the Pauli-*X* mixer are presented in *A. Ground State Probabilities* Figures 9 and 10. Figure 9 shows the average approximation Ground state probability, GSP, is sometimes used as a metric ratio achieved with the basin-hopping parameter optimization and initialization scheme for *n* = 28. As seen similar to the to judge the performance of QAOA. Figures 7 and 8 show the average GSP achieved for both the standard Pauli-*X* mixer and differences discussed in Appendix X-A, the Pauli-*X* mixer the aligned mixer considered in this paper for problem sizes continually decreases to *θ* = 90*◦*, while the aligned mixer *n* = 10 to *n* = 28. As can be seen from the plots, there is sees the signature spike at *θ* = 60*◦*. 10

Figure 10 shows the Pauli-*X* mixer average approximation [4] J. W. Z. Lau, K. H. Lim, H. Shrotriya, and L. C. Kwek, “Nisq computing: where are we and where do we go?” *AAPPS bulletin*, vol. 32, no. 1, ratio achieved (y-axis), vs the problem size *n* (x-axis). Similar p. 27, 2022. to the plots in Section V, in Figure 2, we plot the average [5] A. Abbas, A. Ambainis, B. Augustino, A. B¨artschi, H. Buhrman, approximation ratios for several tilt angles *θ*. C. Coffrin, G. Cortiana, V. Dunjko, D. J. Egger, B. G. Elmegreen, N. Franco, F. Fratini, B. Fuller, J. Gacon, C. Gonciulea, S. Gribling, S. Gupta, S. Hadfield, R. Heese, G. Kircher, T. Kleinert, T. Koch, G. Korpas, S. Lenk, J. Marecek, V. Markov, G. Mazzola, S. Mensa, N. Mohseni, G. Nannicini, C. O’Meara, E. P. Tapia, S. Pokutta, M. Proissl, P. Rebentrost, E. Sahin, B. C. B. Symons, S. Tornow, V. Valls, S. Woerner, M. L. Wolf-Bauwens, J. Yard, S. Yarkoni, D. Zechiel, S. Zhuk, and C. Zoufal, “Quantum optimization: Potential, challenges, and the path forward,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02279 [6] L. L. Ngoc Bao, D. Hanh Le, and D. A. Nguyen, “Application of combi- natorial optimization in logistics,” in *2018 4th International Conference on Green Technology and Sustainable Development (GTSD)*, 2018, pp. 329–334. [7] F. Barahona, M. Gr¨otschel, M. J¨unger, and G. Reinelt, “An application of combinatorial optimization to statistical physics and circuit layout design,” *Operations Research*, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 493–513, 1988. [8] J. Soares, T. Pinto, F. Lezama, and H. Morais, “Survey on complex optimization and simulation for the new power systems paradigm,” *Complexity*, vol. 2018, no. 1, p. 2340628, 2018. [9] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, “A quantum approximate optimization algorithm,” 2014. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ Fig. 9: Pauli-*X* mixer vs Aligned mixer for *n* = 28 average 1411.4028 approximation ratio achieved with basin-hopping (optimizing [10] A. Arrasmith, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, K. Fujii, J. R. for expectation value). McClean, K. Mitarai, X. Yuan, L. Cincio *et al.*, “Variational quantum algorithms,” *Nature Reviews Physics*, vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 625–644, 2021. [11] E. Farhi, D. Gamarnik, and S. Gutmann, “The quantum approximate optimization algorithm needs to see the whole graph: Worst case examples,” *arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.08747*, 2020. [12] ——, “The quantum approximate optimization algorithm needs to see the whole graph: A typical case,” *arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.09002*,
1. [13] S. Bravyi, A. Kliesch, R. Koenig, and E. Tang, “Obstacles to variational

quantum optimization from symmetry protection,” *Physical review let- ters*, vol. 125, no. 26, p. 260505, 2020. [14] M. B. Hastings, “Classical and quantum bounded depth approximation algorithms,” *arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.07047*, 2019. [15] K. Marwaha, “Local classical max-cut algorithm outperforms *p* = 2 qaoa on high-girth regular graphs,” *Quantum*, vol. 5, p. 437, 2021. [16] D. J. Egger, J. Mareˇcek, and S. Woerner, “Warm-starting quantum optimization,” *Quantum*, vol. 5, p. 479, 2021. [17] R. Tate, M. Farhadi, C. Herold, G. Mohler, and S. Gupta, “Bridging classical and quantum with sdp initialized warm-starts for qaoa,” *ACM Transactions on Quantum Computing*, vol. 4, no. 2, feb 2023. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3549554 [18] R. Tate, J. Moondra, B. Gard, G. Mohler, and S. Gupta, “Warm-started qaoa with custom mixers provably converges and computationally beats Fig. 10: Pauli-*X* mixer average approximation ratio vs prob- goemans-williamson’s max-cut at low circuit depths,” *Quantum*, vol. 7, lem size *n* basin-hopping circuit parameter optimization with p. 1121, Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.22331/ **Local Search** warm-start state for *θ* = 0*◦,* 45*◦,* 60*◦,* 90*◦* q-2023-09-26-1121 [19] M. Cain, E. Farhi, S. Gutmann, D. Ranard, and E. Tang, “The tilt angles. Red dashed lines represent the best known 3- qaoa gets stuck starting from a good classical string,” *arXiv preprint* Regular Max-Cut approximation ratio [24] and Farhi’s QAOA *arXiv:2207.05089*, 2022. 3-Regular Max-Cut approximation ratio guarantee for circuit [20] D. A. Spielman and S.-H. Teng, “Smoothed analysis of algorithms: Why the simplex algorithm usually takes polynomial time,” *Journal of the* depth *p* = 1. *ACM (JACM)*, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 385–463, 2004. [21] S. Burer and R. D. Monteiro, “A nonlinear programming algorithm for solving semidefinite programs via low-rank factorization,” *Mathematical* REFERENCES *programming*, vol. 95, no. 2, pp. 329–357, 2003. [1] R. Tate and S. Eidenbenz, “Guarantees on warm-started qaoa: Single- [22] M. X. Goemans and D. P. Williamson, “Improved approximation round approximation ratios for 3-regular maxcut and higher-round algorithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using scaling limits,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2402. semidefinite programming,” *J. ACM*, vol. 42, no. 6, p. 1115–1145, nov 12631
1. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/227683.227684

[2] K. Bharti, A. Cervera-Lierta, T. H. Kyaw, T. Haug, S. Alperin-Lea, [23] J. Golden, A. Bartschi, D. O’Malley, and S. Eidenbenz, “Threshold- A. Anand, M. Degroote, H. Heimonen, J. S. Kottmann, T. Menke *et al.*, based quantum optimization,” in *2021 IEEE International Conference* “Noisy intermediate-scale quantum algorithms,” *Reviews of Modern on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE)*, vol. 95. IEEE, *Physics*, vol. 94, no. 1, p. 015004, 2022. Oct. 2021, p. 137–147. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ [3] C. M. Keller, S. Misra, A. B¨artschi, and S. Eidenbenz, “Quantum QCE52317.2021.00030 approximate optimization: A computational intelligence perspective,” [24] E. Halperin, D. Livnat, and U. Zwick, “Max cut in cubic graphs,”
1. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.07202

*Journal of Algorithms*, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 169–185, 2004. 11

[25] J. Golden, A. Baertschi, D. O’Malley, E. Pelofske, and S. Eidenbenz, “Juliqaoa: Fast, flexible qaoa simulation,” in *Proceedings of the SC ’23 Workshops of The International Conference on High Performance Computing, Network, Storage, and Analysis*, ser. SC-W 2023. ACM, Nov.
1. [Online].

Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3624062. 3624220 12
