# 2410.00027v1

#### Warm-Started QAOA with Aligned Mixers

#### Converges Slowly Near the Poles of the Bloch

#### Sphere

## arXiv:2410.00027v1  [quant-ph]  16 Sep 2024

Reuben Tate[0000Ôłĺ0002Ôłĺ9170Ôłĺ8906] and Stephan Eidenbenz[0000Ôłĺ0002Ôłĺ2628Ôłĺ1854] CCS-3: Information Sciences, Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA {rtate, eidenben}@lanl.gov **Abstract.** In order to boost the performance of the Quantum Approxi- mate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) to solve problems in combinato- rial optimization, researchers have leveraged the solutions returned from classical algorithms in order to create a warm-started quantum initial state for QAOA that is biased towards "good" solutions. Cain et al. showed that if the classically-obtained solutions are mapped to the poles of the Bloch sphere, then vanilla QAOA with the standard mixer "gets stuck". If the classically-obtained solution is instead mapped to within some angle ╬Ş from the poles of the Bloch sphere, creating an initial prod- uct state, then QAOA with optimal variational parameters is known to converge to the optimal solution with increased circuit depth if the mixer is modi´Čüed to be "aligned" with the warm-start initial state. Leverag- ing recent work of Benchasattabuse et al., we provide theoretical lower bounds on the circuit depth necessary for this form of warm-started QAOA to achieve a desired change Ôłć╬╗ in approximation ratio; in par- ticular, we show that for small ╬Ş, the lower bound on the circuit depth roughly scales proportionally with Ôłć╬╗/╬Ş. **Keywords:** Quantum Computing ┬Ě Combinatorial Optimization ┬Ě Quan- tum Approximate Optimization Algorithm.

##### 1

##### Introduction

The Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) [6] and its greatly generalized sibling Quantum Alternating Operator Ansatz (also QAOA) [9] is a leading quantum algorithm or perhaps a quantum heuristic to ´Čünd approximate solutions to combinatorial optimization problems, such as Traveling Salesperson, Satis´Čüability, or ÔÇô and this is the most commonly studied case ÔÇô Maximum Cut. While a diversity of QAOA variations have emerged over the past decade [3], the concept of using a quantum state representation of a high-quality classically ob- tained approximate solution as starting state for QAOA is our focus for analysis. More precisely, we study a case where the classically-obtained initial solution is mapped to within some angle ╬Ş from the poles of the Bloch sphere, creating an initial product state; this QAOA variant with optimal variational parameters is

2 R. Tate, S. Eidenbenz known to converge to the optimal solution with increased circuit depth if the mixer is modi´Čüed to be ÔÇťaligned" with the warm-start initial state. Provable approximation ratio results for QAOA are still very rare. Our work focuses on the e´ČÇect that the parameter ╬Ş has on the behavior of the QAOA circuit, thus giving new insights into the theory of QAOAs. More speci´Čücally, we provide ╬Ş-dependent lower bounds on the required circuit depth needed to achieve a desired change in approximation ratio. The key takeaway is the follow- ing: In the context of warm-started QAOA (with ÔÇťaligned" mixers), one should avoid initializing the warm-start very close to poles of the Bloch sphere (i.e. ╬Ş near 0). Some preliminary numerical simulations [12,5] had already suggested that initializing near the poles was not ideal; this work solidi´Čües such a result with a theoretical backing. While our results do not show a worst-case advantage of warm-start QAOA over either the traditional QAOA approach (e.g. approx- imation ratio of 0.6924 for 3-regular MAX-CUT [6]), the practical advantage of warm-started QAOA in NISQ and numerical experiments should be explored further. This paper is organized as follows: in Section 2, we set up the necessary notation for this work and brie´Čéy review the standard QAOA algorithm, in Section 3, we give a more detailed description of the initial warm-start used and the corresponding ÔÇťaligned" mixer, in Section 4, we consider an illustrative simple toy problem that provides a geometric intuition for why one should expect initializations near the poles to perform poorly, and in Section 5, we provide a theoretical analysis that shows that such an intuition holds more generally as well by proving lower bounds on the circuit depth. We provide a discussion and conclude in Section 6.

##### 2

##### Notation and Background

For the purposes of this work, we assume throughout that we are working with some classical objective function c : {0, 1}n ÔćĺZÔëą0 to be maximized, which maps bitstrings of a particular length to a non-negative integer. We also assume that c is not identically zero everywhere; together with non-negativity, this ensures that cmax := maxxÔłł{0,1}n c(x) > 0. Let A be some (possibly randomized) algorithm and let A(c) be the (expected) objective value obtained by running A with an instance corresponding to objective function c, we then de´Čüne the corresponding (instance-speci´Čüc) approximation ratio1 as, ╬╗A(c) = A(c) cmax ; when the context is clear, we will often write ╬╗A(c) as ╬╗A or even just ╬╗. We will often use the MAX-CUT problem as an example which is as follows: given a graph G = (V, E), partition the vertices V into two groups, S and V \ S, so that the number of edges between the groups is maximized. If |V | = n, the 1 In the classical optimization literature, the term approximation ratio is often only used to refer to worst-case ratio (of the expected algorithm objective value to the optimal objective value) amongst some class of objective functions. In recent years, the term has also been used to refer to the ratio for individual instances, which is how the term will be used in this work.

Warm-Started QAOA Converges Slowly Near the Poles of the Bloch Sphere 3 partitioning of the vertices can be expressed as a bitstring x whose ith bit is 0 if the ith vertex is in S and 1 otherwise. For any ´Čüxed choice of graph G, the 1 corresponding objective function for this problem is: c(x) = P 2(1 Ôłĺzizj) (i,j)ÔłłE where zi = 2xi Ôłĺ1 Ôłł{Ôłĺ1, +1} for all i. **2.1 Standard QAOA** We next review the QAOA algorithm and set up the needed notation that will be used throughout this work. We use X, Y, Z to denote the standard Pauli matrices. For a multi-qubit system, we use Xj, Yj, Zj to denote the operation of applying X, Y, or Z to the jth qubit respectively. We use I and 0 to denote the identity and all-zeros matrix respectively; the dimensions of such matrices will be clear from context. For any square matrix M and scalar t, we de´Čüne the corresponding matrix U(M, c) := eÔłĺitM. For a combinatorial optimization problem determined by a cost function c : {0, 1}n ÔćĺZÔëą0 on n-length bitstrings, we de´Čüne the corresponding cost Hamiltonian as the matrix C such that C |bÔčę= c(b) |bÔčę. Given a classical objective function c on n-length bitstrings (with correspond- ing cost Hamiltonian C), a Hermitian matrix B (called the mixing Hamilto- nian) of appropriate size, and initial quantum state |¤łiÔčęin a 2n-dimensional Hilbert space, a circuit depth p, and variational parameters ╬│ = (╬│1, . . . , ╬│p), ╬▓ = (╬▓1, . . . , ╬▓p), we de´Čüne the following variational waveform of depth-p QAOA as follows: |¤łp(╬│, ╬▓)Ôčę:= U(B, ╬▓p)U(C, ╬│p) ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě U(B, ╬▓1)U(C, ╬│1) |¤łiÔčę. (1) For unconstrained optimization problems, the mixing Hamiltonian B is usu- ally taken to be the transverse ´Čüeld mixer, which, for an n-qubit system, is de´Čüned as n X BTF = Xj. (2) j=1 Additionally, the starting state is usually taken to be an equal superposition of all 2n bitstrings of length n: 1 |¤łiÔčę= |+ÔčęÔŐŚn = X ÔłÜ |bÔčę. (3) 2n bÔłł{0,1}n In the case where |¤łiÔčęis the most-excited state of HB, there exists a choice of angles ╬│ and ╬▓ for which the QAOA circuit can be viewed as a Trotterization of the Quantum Adiabatic Algorithm which is known to, under mild assumptions (see [6,2]), converge to the optimal solution given enough time; in other words, for a cost function c that we wish to maximize, we have that: h i pÔćĺÔł×max lim ÔčĘ¤łp(╬│, ╬▓)| C |¤łp(╬│, ╬▓)Ôčę = xÔłł{0,1}n c(x), max ╬│,╬▓ where ÔčĘ¤łp(╬│, ╬▓)| C |¤łp(╬│, ╬▓)Ôčęis the expected cost value obtained from measuring the output state of QAOA.

4 R. Tate, S. Eidenbenz

##### 3

##### Initial Product States and Aligned Mixers

For the standard QAOA algorithm [6] and many of its variants, the equal su- perposition |¤łiÔčę= |+ÔčęÔŐŚn is used as the initial state. In the context of MAX-CUT for example, quantum measurement of |+ÔčęÔŐŚn produces a uniform distribution of all 2n cuts in the graph; put another way, each vertex, independent of the other vertices, has probability 1/2 of being on one side of the cut or the other. However, one can consider modifying the QAOA algorithm by using a dif- ferent initial state |¤łiÔčę. Often, such initial states are constructed as a function of classically obtained solutions. This method is parametrized by a parameter ╬Ş which we refer to as the initialization angle; to this end, we ´Čürst introduce some helpful notation. **3.1 Construction of Warm-Started States** Let n = (x, y, z) be a unit vector written in Cartesian coordinates. We let |nÔčę denote the single-qubit quantum state whose qubit position on the Bloch sphere is n. For n = (x, y, z), we de´Čüne the following single-qubit operation: Bn = xX + yY + zZ, (4) and let Bn,j denote the operation of applying the operation Bn on the jth qubit. The unitary U(Bn,j, ╬▓) can be geometrically interpreted as a single-qubit rotation by angle 2╬▓ about the axis that points in the n direction [8]. For an n-qubit product state |sÔčę= Nn j=1 |njÔčę, we de´Čüne an n-qubit operation B|sÔčęin terms of the single-qubit operations above: n X B|sÔčę= Bnj,j. (5) j=1 When |sÔčęis a product state, one can show that |sÔčęcan be prepared and that B|sÔčęcan be implemented in most quantum devices with a constant-depth circuit using standard single-qubit rotation gates about the x, y, and z axes. Moreover, they [12] remark that |sÔčęis a ground state of B|sÔčęfor any product state |sÔčę. Thus, as remarked in [12], as long as none of the qubits of the initial product state |¤łiÔčęare initialized at the poles, running QAOA with the standard phase separator C and mixer B|¤łiÔčęwill yield the optimal solution as the circuit depth goes to in´Čünity (assuming that ╬│ and ╬▓ are chosen optimally) [12]. In general, whenever the initial state of QAOA is the ground state of the mixer, we say that the mixer is aligned with the initial state, and refer to this category of QAOA variants as QAOA with aligned mixers. Prior approaches for warm-started QAOA considered initial states of the form |¤łiÔčę= Nn j=1 |njÔčęwhere n1, . . . , nn are obtained by some classical proce- dure. In the work by Egger et al. [5], for problems whose corresponding QUBO (Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization) formulation satis´Čües certain

Warm-Started QAOA Converges Slowly Near the Poles of the Bloch Sphere 5 properties, they solve a relaxation of the QUBO and map the solutions to states in, **Arc** = {cos(╬Ş/2) |0Ôčę+ sin(╬Ş/2) |1Ôčę: ╬Ş Ôłł(0, ¤Ç)}, (6) i.e., points on the Bloch sphere that intersect with the xz-plane with non- negative x coordinate; the blue arc in Figure 1 corresponds to the possible qubit positions. For the MAX-CUT problem, Tate et al. [12,11] consider higher- dimensional relaxations of the Max-Cut problem (i.e. the Burer-Monteiro re- laxation and the relaxation used in the Goemans-Williamson algorithm) which, after a possible projection, yield points all over the surface of the Bloch sphere; however, any advantages this method has over others cannot be attributed to simply utilizing more of the Bloch sphereÔÇÖs surface as seen in the following re- mark. Remark 1. Tate et al. [12] show that for every initial product state |¤łiÔčę= Nn j=1 |njÔčę, there exists a di´ČÇerent initial product state |¤łÔÇ▓ iÔčę= Nn j=1 |nÔÇ▓ jÔčęwith nÔÇ▓ j Ôłł**Arc** for all j, such that, up to a global phase, QAOA with aligned mix- ers and initial state |¤łiÔčęreturns the same state as QAOA with aligned mixers and initial state |¤łÔÇ▓ iÔčę. This property holds for any optimization problem and corresponding cost Hamiltonian C. More speci´Čücally, if |njÔčę= cos(╬Şj/2) |0Ôčę+ ei¤ćj sin(╬Şj/2) |1Ôčęis an arbitrary qubit on the Bloch sphere with polar angle 0 ÔëĄ╬Şj ÔëĄ¤Ç and azimuthal angle 0 ÔëĄ¤ćj < 2¤Ç, then one can choose |nÔÇ▓ jÔčę= cos(╬Şj/2) |0Ôčę+ sin(╬Şj/2) |1Ôčę. We now explicitly de´Čüne the warm-starts used in this work. First, for any product state |sÔčę= Nn j=1 |sjÔčę, we de´Čüne ╬Şj and ¤ćj to be the polar and azimuthal angle of |sjÔčęon the Bloch sphere, i.e., |sjÔčę= cos(╬Ş/2) |0Ôčę+ ei¤ć sin(╬Ş/2) |1Ôčę. For each j Ôłł[n], we use ╦ć╬Şj to measure the angle that the jth qubit is to the nearest pole, i.e., ╦ć╬Şj = min(╬Şj, ¤Ç Ôłĺ╬Şj). This work focuses on the restriction that each qubit is at most angle ╬Ş Ôłł[0, ¤Ç/2] away from one of the poles, i.e., ╦ć╬Şj ÔëĄ╬Ş for all j Ôłł[n]; we refer to such warm-starts as within-╬Ş-warm-starts. In light of Remark 1 above, in the context of warm-started QAOA with within-╬Ş-warm- starts with aligned mixers, it su´Čâces to only consider warm-starts of the form |¤łiÔčę= Nn j=1 |╬ŞjÔčęwhere |╬ŞjÔčę:= cos(╬Ş/2) |0Ôčę+ sin(╬Ş/2) |1ÔčęÔłł**Arc** with ╦ć╬Şj ÔëĄ╬Ş for all j Ôłł[n]. In addition, we also consider a subclass of within-╬Ş-warm-starts where each qubit is exactly some ´Čüxed angle from the poles of the Bloch sphere, i.e., ╬Şj = ╬Ş for all j Ôłł[n]; we refer to such warm-starts as at-╬Ş-warm-starts. As seen in Figure 1, this forces each qubit to be in one of two positions on the Bloch sphere; this naturally induces a corresponding bitstring b Ôłł{0, 1}n with the property that at ╬Ş = 0, measuring the warm-start yields exactly the state |bÔčę. For the MAX-CUT problem, previous works have considered QAOA with at- ╬Ş-warm-starts. Tate et al. [10] provided some theoretical results for at-╬Ş-warm- starts in the case of single-round Max-Cut QAOA on 3-regular graphs with aligned mixers. Egger et al. [5] consider a QAOA-variant (di´ČÇerent than their QUBO-relaxation variant) with at-╬Ş-warm-starts with ╬Ş = ¤Ç/3, but with an

6 R. Tate, S. Eidenbenz |0Ôčę z |╬ŞÔčę ╬Ş x y ╬Ş |¤ÇÔłĺ╬ŞÔčę |1Ôčę **Fig. 1.** A geometric depiction of the states |╬ŞÔčęand |¤Ç Ôłĺ╬ŞÔčęon the Bloch sphere; these two positions correspond to qubit positions found in at-╬Ş-warm-starts. The blue half- circle, **Arc**, in the xz-plane denotes all the possible positions for |╬ŞÔčęas ╬Ş varies from 0 to ¤Ç. unaligned mixer that has the property that there exists parameters ╬│ and ╬▓ such that depth-1 QAOA yields the bitstring b corresponding to the warm-start (i.e. it returns exactly |bÔčę). Cain et al. [4] considered Max-Cut QAOA with at-╬Ş- warm-starts with ╬Ş = 0 with the transverse ´Čüeld mixer; it was found that when the cut associated with the corresponding bitstring b was a ÔÇťgood" cut, then this variant of QAOA yields little to no improvement regardless of the circuit depth used.

##### 4

##### A Toy Problem

Before giving the formal result, we ´Čürst consider a toy problem to give the reader intuition for why one might expect warm-started QAOA to perform poorly if the warm-start is initialized near the poles. This toy problem consists of a single qubit and the classical objective function is given by c(x) = x for x Ôłł{0, 1}. This corresponding cost Hamiltonian is technically C = 1 2(I + Z) but we can instead2 use the simpler Hamiltonian C = Z. For general problems, if the corresponding bitstring b of a at-╬Ş-warm-start is non-optimal, then the QAOA circuit e´ČÇectively needs to ÔÇťcorrect" certain qubits so that they are on the opposite hemisphere of the Bloch sphere from where they started. For our toy problem, since maxx c(x) = 1, if we initialize with the warmstart |¤łiÔčę= |╬ŞÔčęwith ╬Ş small, then the QAOA circuit needs to move the qubit from (near the) north pole of the Bloch sphere to the south pole. 2 A similar replacement technique, obtained by shifting and scaling the cost objective, is discussed in Section 5.

Warm-Started QAOA Converges Slowly Near the Poles of the Bloch Sphere 7 z

| \|s\|sÔłĺ12ÔčęÔčę \|s3Ôčę ╬Ş ╬Ş ╬Ş \|s5Ôčę ╬Ş ╬Ş ╬Ş | \|s0Ôčę \|s2Ôčę ╬Ş ╬Ş ╬Ş ╬Ş \|s4Ôčę ╬Ş ╬Ş |
| --- | --- |
| ╬Ş ╬Ş \|s7Ôčę | ╬Ş ╬Ş \|s6Ôčę |

x **Fig. 2.** An illustration of the evolution of quantum state as each unitary of the QAOA circuit is applied. The large circle represents the intersection of the Bloch sphere with the xz-plane. The two alternating unitaries of the QAOA circuit correspond to a single- qubit rotation, represented by the two red arrows. Starting with the warm-start initial state |s0Ôčę, the state |sjÔčę(j = 0, 1, . . . , 7) represents the quantum state after j unitary operations of the QAOA; when j is even, then |sjÔčęrepresents the result of a depth-p QAOA circuit with p = j/2. For our toy problem, both QAOA unitaries, U(B|¤łiÔčę, ╬▓) and U(C, ╬│) = U(Z, ╬│) correspond to single-qubit rotations on the Bloch sphere, with the for- mer rotating about the original qubit position and the latter rotating about the z-axis of the Bloch sphere. To simplify matters, we assume that the variational parameters ╬│ and ╬▓ are non-zero and are chosen so that the resulting (single- qubit) state stays in the xz-plane of the Bloch sphere after each QAOA unitary (i.e. rotation); this assumption puts an upper bound on the required circuit depth needed to achieve some change in approximation ratio since there may perhaps be better choices for ╬│ and ╬▓. When ╬Ş is small, it takes several layers of the QAOA circuit to signi´Čücantly move the qubit away from its original position since the axes of rotation for both QAOA unitaries are so close to another as seen in Figure 2. In particular, the QAOA circuit evolves the state as follows: |╬ŞÔčęÔćĺ|Ôłĺ╬ŞÔčęÔćĺ|3╬ŞÔčęÔćĺ|Ôłĺ3╬ŞÔčęÔćĺ|5╬ŞÔčęÔćĺ┬Ě ┬Ě ┬Ě . (7) In general, after p layers of the QAOA circuit, the resulting quantum state will be |(2p + 1)╬ŞÔčę. Since maxx c(x) = 1, then the resulting initial and ´Čünal approximation ratios are ╬╗i = sin2(╬Ş/2) and ╬╗f = sin2((2p+1)╬Ş/2) respectively. For very small values of ╬Ş, ╬╗i Ôëł0, and thus the change in approximation is approximately, Ôłć╬╗ Ôëł╬╗f = sin2((2p + 1)╬Ş/2). (8)

8 R. Tate, S. Eidenbenz If Ôłć╬╗ is held constant, then the right-hand side of Equation 8 is also constant, which can only occur if 2p + 1 and ╬Ş are inversely proportional to one another, i.e., the required circuit depth scales as p = O(1/╬Ş) for small ╬Ş. While the toy example gives a geometric intuition for why small initialization angles are bad, this intuition is di´Čâcult to directly generalize for multi-qubit systems since the Bloch sphere is not suitable for modeling entangled systems. Instead, we consider a more sophisticated approach in the next section, allowing us to obtain lower bounds on the required circuit depth needed to achieve certain changes in approximation ratio.

##### 5

##### Bounds on Required Depth for Small Initialization

##### Angle

Recent work by Benchasattabuse et al. [1] provide lower bounds on the number of rounds of QAOA that are required to obtain guaranteed approximation ratios; moreover, such bounds are applicable across a wide variety of optimization prob- lems, phase separators, and mixing Hamiltonians. We now analyze such bounds in the context of warm-started QAOA and eventually show (Theorem 4) that for a desired change of approximation ratio Ôłć╬╗, the required number of rounds scales roughly as ÔäŽ(Ôłć╬╗/╬Ş) for small ╬Ş approaching zero. Benchasattabuse et al. [1] obatined the QAOA circuit-depth bounds by utiliz- ing one of the lower bounds on quantum annealing times found by Garc├şa-Pintos et al. [7] which we summarize below in Theorem 1. **Theorem 1 (Garc├şa-Pintos et al. [7]).** Let H(t) = (1 Ôłĺg(t))H0 + g(t)H1 be a quantum annealing annealing schedule where g(0) = 0 and g(tf) = 1, tf is the total annealing time, and H0 and H1 are Hamiltonians with zero ground state energies. For t Ôłł[0, tf], let |¤łtÔčębe the quantum state at time t of the annealing process. If |¤ł0Ôčęis a ground state of H0, then the following inequality holds: tf ÔëąÔčĘH0Ôčętf + ÔčĘH1Ôčę0 ÔłĺÔčĘH1Ôčętf , (9) Ôłą[H1, H0]Ôłą where for any appropriately-sized Hamiltonian H and t Ôłł[0, tf], ÔčĘHÔčęt := ÔčĘ¤łt| H |¤łtÔčę. Benchasattabuse et al. [1] are able to translate these bounds on annealing times into bounds on QAOA circuit depth by using the fact that QAOA can be interpreted as quantum annealing with a ÔÇťbang-bang" schedule, i.e., H1 and H0 correspond to the phase separator and mixing Hamiltonian respectively, the annealing schedule is such that g(t) Ôłł{0, 1} for all t Ôłł[0, tf], and the annealing time is Pp j=1(|╬▓j| + |╬│j|). Remark 2. The above paragraph should **not** be misinterpreted to mean that the results of this paper only work for QAOA with speci´Čüc parameter choices (e.g. choosing ╬│ and ╬▓ in a way corresponding to a linear annealing schedule). The results in this paper hold for any choice of ╬│ and ╬▓ parameters.

Warm-Started QAOA Converges Slowly Near the Poles of the Bloch Sphere 9 The QAOA circuit-depth bounds obtained by Benchasattabuse et al. (Theo- rem 2 of [1]) assume that the initial state is the equal superposition state |+ÔčęÔŐŚn. It is not too di´Čâcult to adjust the bounds (and the corresponding proof) to account for arbitrary initial states. We state the adjusted bounds in Theorem 2 and prove that such an adjustment is correct. **Theorem 2.** Given a classical objective function c(x) for a maximization task, represented by the Hamiltonian C, encoded into a phase separator Hamiltonian H1 = cmaxI ÔłĺC and a mixing Hamiltonian H0, where all Hamiltonians are 2¤Ç periodic with zero ground state energies. Let cmax denote the global maximum of c(x). Let |¤łiÔčębe a ground state of H0 such that measurement of |¤łiÔčęyields an approximation ratio of ╬╗i. If a QAOA protocol with p rounds driven by H0 and H1 that starts from |¤łiÔčęand reaches a state |¤łfÔčęwith approximation ratio ╬╗f, then, p ÔëąÔčĘ¤łf| H0 |¤łfÔčę+ Ôłć╬╗ ┬Ě cmax , (10) 4¤ÇÔłą[C, H0]Ôłą where Ôłć╬╗ = ╬╗f Ôłĺ╬╗i. Proof. In the proof by [1], they show that the above bound holds if Ôłć╬╗ ┬Ě cmax is instead replaced with ÔčĘ¤łi| H1 |¤łiÔčęÔłĺÔčĘ¤łf| H1 |¤łfÔčę; this is true even if |¤łiÔčę╠Ş = |+ÔčęÔŐŚn. However, these two expressions are equal: ÔčĘ¤łi| H1 |¤łiÔčęÔłĺÔčĘ¤łf| H1 |¤łfÔčę= ÔčĘ¤łf| C |¤łfÔčęÔłĺÔčĘ¤łi| C |¤łiÔčę
1. = cmax╬╗f Ôłĺcmax╬╗i

(12) = Ôłć╬╗ ┬Ě cmax, (13) hence showing that this adjusted version of the bound holds. The original bound, p ÔëąÔčĘ¤łf| H0 |¤łfÔčę+ cmax╬╗f Ôłĺcavg . (14) 4¤ÇÔłą[C, H0]Ôłą in the statement of Theorem 2 of [1], which assumes that |¤łiÔčę= |+ÔčęÔŐŚn, can be obtained from our adjusted bounds by observing that, ╬╗icmax = ÔčĘ+|ÔŐŚn C |+ÔčęÔŐŚn cmax = cavg. (15) cmax For convenience, we consider a looser-version of the bound in Corollary 1 and use pmin to denote the value of this looser bound. **Corollary 1.** The bound in the statement of Theorem 2 can be replaced with Ôłć╬╗ ┬Ě cmax p Ôëąpmin := 4¤ÇÔłą[C, H0]Ôłą. (16) Proof. This follows from Theorem 2 and that ÔčĘ¤łf| H0 |¤łfÔčęÔëą0 (as H0 is assumed to have a zero ground state energy).

10 R. Tate, S. Eidenbenz Before continuing, we point out certain important conditions in Theorem 2. First, all of the mixers need to be 2¤Ç periodic. In particular, this will hold for the cost Hamiltonian if the corresponding classical objective function c : {0, 1}n ÔćĺR has integer objective values, i.e., c(x) ÔłłZ for all x Ôłł{0, 1}n. Now consider the transverse ´Čüeld mixer BTF and a warm-start mixer B|¤łiÔčęthat is aligned with the warm-start |¤łiÔčę. It can be shown that both of these are 2¤Ç periodic; however, Theorem 2 also requires that the mixers also have zero energy which is not the case for BTF and B|¤łiÔčę. In particular, for any product state |sÔčę, the mixer B|sÔčę has energies ranging from Ôłĺn to n (see [12] for a proof); however, we can shift the mixers to have energies ranging from 0 to n as so: ╦ćB|sÔčę:= 1 2(nI ÔłĺB|sÔčę). Choosing |sÔčęappropriately, we have ╦ćBTF := 1 2(nIÔłĺBTF) and ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę:= 1 2(nIÔłĺB|¤łiÔčę), where ╦ćBTF and ╦ćB|¤łiÔčęhave energies ranging from 0 to n. Moreover, now |+ÔčęÔŐŚn and |¤łiÔčę are ground states of ╦ćBTF and B|¤łiÔčęrespectively as required by Theorem 2. With some appropriate rescaling of the variational parameters ╬│ and ╬▓, one can show that replacing BTF with ╦ćBTF (or B|¤łiÔčęwith ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) in the QAOA circuit will result in the same ´Čünal state. Nonetheless, it is important to consider the versions of these mixers with zero-ground state energy as the commutator term [C, H0] in Theorem 2 and Corollary 1 assume the mixer is written in such a form. The following lemma will be helpful in regards to analyzing such commutators. **Lemma 1.** Let |¤łiÔčę= Nn j=1 |╬ŞjÔčę= Nn j=1 |njÔčębe a within-╬Ş-warm-start. Then, [Bnj,j, C] = sin(╦ć╬Şj)[Xj, C], where ╦ć╬Şj is the angle that the jth qubit is away from one of the poles of the Bloch sphere (de´Čüned in Section 3.1). Proof. Recall that B|¤łiÔčę= Pn j=1 Bnj,j, where Bnj,j = xjXj+yjYj+zjZj, where nj = (xj, yj, zj) is the position of the jth qubit in Cartesian coordinates. Given |¤łiÔčę= Nn j=1 |╬ŞjÔčę, we can calculate the jth qubit position as: nj = (sin(╬Şj), 0, cos(╬Şj)) (17) and thus, we have that, Bnj = sin(╬Ş)Xj + cos(╬Ş)Zj. Since [Zj, C] = 0 for all j Ôłł[n], we have that [Bnj,j, C] = sin(╬Şj)[Xj, C]. To complete the proof, it su´Čâces to show that sin(╬Şj) = sin(╦ć╬Şj); this can be seen by recalling the identity sin(x) = sin(¤Ç Ôłĺx) and the fact that ╦ć╬Şj = min(╬Şj, ¤Ç Ôłĺ╬Şj). Using the commutator relation in Lemma 1, we now present our main result which places a lower bound on the required number of angles for warm-started QAOA with within-╬Ş-warm-starts. **Theorem 3.** Fix a phase separator H1 = cmaxI ÔłĺC (where C is a Hamilto- nian that corresponds to some classical objective function c(x)), choice of Ôłć╬╗, and a within-╬Ş-warm-start |¤łiÔčę. Let pmin( ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) correspond to the bound pmin in Corollary 1 where H0 is replaced with H0 = ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę. Then, Ôłć╬╗ pmin( ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) Ôëą sin(╬Ş)F(c), (18)

Warm-Started QAOA Converges Slowly Near the Poles of the Bloch Sphere 11 where F(c) is a function that depends on the classical objective c and is inde- pendent of Ôłć╬╗, |¤łiÔčę, and ╬Ş. Proof. Recall from Remark 1, that we may assume (without loss of generality) that |¤łiÔčęhas the form |¤łiÔčę= Nn j=1 |╬ŞjÔčęwhere ╦ć╬Şj (the angle that the jth qubit of |¤łiÔčęis from the nearest pole on the Bloch sphere) lies in the interval [0, ╬Ş]. Now, recall that B|¤łiÔčę= Pn j=1 Bnj,j, where nj = (xj, yj, zj) is the posi- tion of the jth qubit in Cartesian coordinates. Also recall from Lemma 1 that [Bnj,j, C] = sin(╦ć╬Şj)[Xj, C]. Thus, it follows that, n n sin(╦ć╬Şj)[Xj, C]. X X [B|¤łiÔčę, C] = [Bnj,j, C] = (19) j=1 j=1 Taking norms on both sides yields, ÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľ ÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľÔÇľ n n sin(╬Ş) Ôłą[Xj, C]Ôłą= sin(╬Ş) F(c) ┬Ě cmax X sin(╦ć╬Şj)[Xj, C] X Ôłą[B|¤łiÔčę, C] = ÔëĄ 2¤Ç , j=1 j=1 where, Ôłĺ1 ´úź ´úÂ n F(c) = cmax X 2¤Ç ┬Ě Ôłą[Xj, C]Ôłą . (20) ´úş ´úŞ j=1 Using basic commutator properties, it is easy to show that [ ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę, C] = Ôłĺ1 2[B|¤łiÔčę, C]. Finally, from the de´Čünition of pmin in Corollary 1, we have Ôłć╬╗ ┬Ě cmax Ôłć╬╗ ┬Ě cmax Ôłć╬╗ pmin( ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) = = 2¤ÇÔłą[C, B|¤łiÔčę]ÔłąÔëą sin(╬Ş)F(c). 4¤ÇÔłą[C, ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę]Ôłą Note that for small ╬Ş, sin(╬Ş) Ôëł╬Ş, so in such a case, the required number of rounds of warm-started QAOA, as a function of initialization angle ╬Ş and desired change in approximation ratio Ôłć╬╗, scales as p = ÔäŽ(Ôłć╬╗/╬Ş). In particular, the number of required rounds approaches in´Čünity as ╬Ş approaches 0, which suggests that the method of warm-started QAOA discussed in this work is not recommended for very small choices of ╬Ş if one wishes to obtain an appreciable value of Ôłć╬╗. In the special case of at-╬Ş-warm-starts, where each qubit in the warm-start is exactly angle ╬Ş away from one of the poles, we have a slightly stronger result that directly relates the lower bounds on the required number of rounds required for warm-started QAOA vs standard QAOA. **Theorem 4.** Fix a phase separator H1 = cmaxI ÔłĺC (where C is a Hamiltonian that corresponds to some classical objective function c(x)), choice of Ôłć╬╗, and let |¤łiÔčębe an at-╬Ş-warm-start for some 0 ÔëĄ╬Ş ÔëĄ¤Ç/2. Let pmin( ╦ćBTF) and pmin( ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) correspond to the bound pmin in Corollary 1 where H0 is replaced with H0 = ╦ćBTF and H0 = ╦ćB|¤łiÔčęrespectively. Then, 1 pmin( ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) = sin ╬Ş ┬Ě pmin( ╦ćBTF). (21)

12 R. Tate, S. Eidenbenz Proof. Recall from Remark 1, that we may assume (without loss of generality) that |¤łiÔčęhas the form |¤łiÔčę= Nn j=1 |╬ŞjÔčę. Since |¤łiÔčęwas an at-╬Ş-warm-start, then ╦ć╬Şj (the angle that the jth qubit of |¤łiÔčęis from the nearest pole on the Bloch sphere) is equal to ╬Ş for all j Ôłł[n]. As a result of Lemma 1 we have [Bnj,j, C] = sin(╦ć╬Şj)[Xj, C] = sin(╬Ş)[Xj, C]. Thus, it follows that, n n X X [B|¤łiÔčę, C] = [Bnj,j, C] = sin(╬Ş) [Xj, C] = sin(╬Ş) ┬Ě [BTF, C]. (22) j=1 j=1 The result then follows from the commutator relation above and the de´Čünition of pmin in Corollary 1. One should be careful in interpreting Theorem 4; since pmin( ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) Ôëąpmin( ╦ćBTF), at ´Čürst glance, it appears that it is always preferable to run standard QAOA. However, this is not necessarily the case. First, the inequality is a result of com- paring lower bounds which are not necessarily tight, the relationship between the actual number of required rounds (between standard QAOA and warm-started QAOA) may actually be much di´ČÇerent. Second, even if the bounds were tight, this relationship between pmin( ╦ćB|¤łiÔčę) and pmin( ╦ćBTF) assumes that Ôłć╬╗ ´Čüxed; if instead the target approximation ratio ╬╗f is ´Čüxed and ╬╗i is allowed to vary, then this relationship does not necessarily hold. In particular, numerical evi- dence such as those found in [12] and [5], suggest that for many instances and for a suitable choice of ╬Ş, the number of required rounds to achieve a particular target approximation ratio ╬╗f for warm-started QAOA is much less compared to standard QAOA.

##### 6

##### Discussion and Conclusion

This work is consistent with preliminary numerical simulations [12,5] which sug- gests that there is very little change in the approximation ratio when the initial- ization angle ╬Ş is near zero; there were previous geometrical intuitions for why this was the case, but this work shows de´Čünitively that small choices of initial- ization angles are not suitable for warm-started QAOA with aligned mixers. It should be noted our results are fundamentally a consequence of QAOA with aligned mixers being able to be interpreted as a quantum-annealing protocol with a bang-bang schedule; for QAOA with non-aligned mixers, it is likely the case that an entirely di´ČÇerent type of analysis is necessary to obtain similar lower bounds on the circuit depth. **Acknowledgments.** This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy through the Los Alamos National Laboratory. Los Alamos National Laboratory is operated by Triad National Security, LLC, for the National Nuclear Security Admin- istration of U.S. Department of Energy (Contract No. 89233218CNA000001).

Warm-Started QAOA Converges Slowly Near the Poles of the Bloch Sphere 13

##### References
1. Benchasattabuse, N., B├Ąrtschi, A., Garc├şa-Pintos, L.P., Golden, J., Lemons, N.,

Eidenbenz, S.: Lower bounds on number of qaoa rounds required for guaranteed approximation ratios. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.15442 (2023)
1. Binkowski, L., Ko├čmann, G., Ziegler, T., Schwonnek, R.: Elementary proof of qaoa

convergence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04968 (2023)
1. Blekos, K., Brand, D., Ceschini, A., Chou, C.H., Li, R.H., Pandya, K., Summer,

A.: A review on quantum approximate optimization algorithm and its variants. Physics Reports **1068**, 1ÔÇô66 (2024)
1. Cain, M., Farhi, E., Gutmann, S., Ranard, D., Tang, E.: The qaoa gets stuck

starting from a good classical string. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.05089 (2022)
1. Egger, D.J., Mare─Źek, J., Woerner, S.: Warm-starting quantum optimization.

Quantum **5**, 479 (2021)
1. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., Gutmann, S.: A quantum approximate optimization al-

gorithm. arXiv preprint arXiv:1411.4028 (2014)
1. Garc├şa-Pintos, L.P., Brady, L.T., Bringewatt, J., Liu, Y.K.: Lower bounds on quan-

tum annealing times. Physical Review Letters **130**(14), 140601 (2023)
1. Glendinning,

I.: Rotations on the bloch sphere (2010). https://doi.org/10.13140/RG.2.2.27566.25922
1. Had´Čüeld, S., Wang, Z., OÔÇÖGorman, B., Rie´ČÇel, E.G., Venturelli, D., Biswas, R.:

From the quantum approximate optimization algorithm to a quantum alternating operator ansatz. Algorithms **12**(2) (2019). https://doi.org/10.3390/a12020034, https://www.mdpi.com/1999-4893/12/2/34
1. Tate, R., Eidenbenz, S.: Guarantees on warm-started qaoa: Single-round approxi-

mation ratios for 3-regular maxcut and higher-round scaling limits. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.12631 (2024)
1. Tate, R., Farhadi, M., Herold, C., Mohler, G., Gupta, S.: Bridging classical and

quantum with sdp initialized warm-starts for qaoa. ACM Transactions on Quantum Computing **4**(2), 1ÔÇô39 (2023)
1. Tate,

R., Moondra, J., Gard, B., Mohler, G., Gupta, S.: Warm-Started QAOA with Custom Mixers Provably Converges and Computationally Beats Goemans-WilliamsonÔÇÖs Max-Cut at Low Circuit Depths. Quan- tum **7**, 1121 (Sep 2023). https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-09-26-1121, https://doi.org/10.22331/q-2023-09-26-1121

### This figure "VQE.PNG" is available in "PNG"
 format from:

### http://arxiv.org/ps/2410.00027v1

### This figure "subgraphs.PNG" is available in "PNG"
 format from:

### http://arxiv.org/ps/2410.00027v1
