# 41598_2023_Article_50406

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
|  | www.nature.com/scientificreports |

## Systematic study

### OPEN

## onВ theВ dependence

## ofВ theВ warmвҖ‘start quantum

## approximate optimization

## algorithm onВ approximate

## solutions

**KenВ N.В OkadaвҖҠ1*****, HirofumiВ NishiвҖҠ2,3, TaichiВ KosugiвҖҠ2,3В & YuвҖ‘ichiroВ MatsushitaвҖҠ2,3,4 Quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) is a promising hybrid quantum-classical algorithm to solve combinatorial optimization problems in the era of noisy intermediate-scale quantum computers. Recently it has been revealed that warm-start approaches can improve the performance of QAOA, where approximate solutions are obtained by classical algorithms in advance and incorporated into the initial state and/or unitary ansatz. In this work, we study in detail how the accuracy of approximate solutions affects the performance of the warm-start QAOA (WS-QAOA). We numerically find that in typical MAX-CUT problems, WS-QAOA achieves higher fidelity (probability that exact solutions are observed) and approximation ratio than QAOA as the Hamming distance of approximate solutions to the exact ones becomes smaller. We reveal that this could be quantitatively attributed to the initial state of the ansatz. We also solve MAX-CUT problems by WS-QAOA with approximate solutions obtained via QAOA, having higher fidelity and approximation ratio than QAOA especially when the circuit is relatively shallow. We believe that our study may deepen understanding of the performance of WS-QAOA and also provide a guide as to the necessary quality of approximate solutions.** The last decade has seen significant technological progress in manufacturing hardware platform of quantum computers1. The current pace of scale-up in quantum devices raises a hope that quantum processors with hun- dreds or thousands of physical qubits could be available within the next decade. These near-term quantum com- puters are referred to as noisy intermediate-scale quantum (NISQ) computers2 in that they are classically intrac- table, but still not sufficiently large to implement quantum error correction. As the NISQ era approaches, there have been an increasing number of researches that develop algorithms to efficiently leverage NISQ devices3вҖ“5. They are designed to solve quantum many-body problems in chemistry and physics as well as classical problems in combinatorial optimization and machine learning. Most of these studies employ hybrid quantum-classical approaches, primarily variational quantum algorithms6,7. In these algorithms, variational quantum states are created via parametrized quantum circuits on a quantum computer, whereas the parameters are updated on a classical computer to optimize the objective function calculated with the measurement outcomes. Since vari- ational quantum algorithms generally take a relatively low number of gate operations, they are considered as suitable to gain quantum advantage on NISQ computers. Quantum approximate optimization algorithm (QAOA)8, a representative example of variational quantum algorithms, solves combinatorial optimization problems in a spirit analogous to adiabatic quantum annealing (QA)9вҖ“11. The variational state (ansatz) of QAOA can be deduced by applying the Trotter decomposition to the time evolution of QA and allowing the time step of each term to vary. Despite some numerical demonstrations 1Center for Quantum Information and Quantum Biology, Osaka University, OsakaВ 560вҖ‘8531, Japan. 2Laboratory for Materials and Structures, Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, TokyoВ  152вҖ‘8550, Japan. 3Quemix Inc., TokyoВ  103вҖ‘0027, Japan. 4Quantum Material and Applications Research Center, National Institutes for Quantum Science and Technology, TokyoВ 152вҖ‘8552, Japan. *email: okada.ken.qiqb@osaka-u.ac.jp **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167 | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 1 Vol.:(0123456789)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ of its efficacy in small-size problems12,13, it has been a subject of discussions whether QAOA could practically outperform the best classical algorithms14,15. Several kinds of variants have been proposed to improve upon the original version of QAOA16вҖ“22. To name a few, FarhiВ etВ al. proposed a variant of the ansatz by allowing different parameters for each rotation gate16. HadfieldВ etВ al. extended the ansatz by generalizing mixer operations, which could be suitable to optimization problems with constraints19. A promising variant that our work will focus on is the warm-start QAOA (WS-QAOA) proposed by EggerВ etВ al.21 and TateВ etВ al.22. The warm-start approach adjusts the distribution of bit strings in the initial state of the ansatz away from the equal superposition for standard QAOA to increase the amplitude of a classically- obtained approximate solution. Both of Refs.21 and22 showed enhancement of the solution quality relative to the original version of QAOA particularly for small depth. EggerВ etВ al. encode rounded/unrounded semidefinite programming solutions into the initial state as well as the mixer term in the ansatz21. They numerically showed improvement in the optimized energy and fidelity compared to standard QAOA in portfolio optimization prob- lems by warm-starting QAOA with classically-obtained continuous solutions. They also solved MAX-CUT problems by WS-QAOA with rounded solutions produced by the Goemans-Williamson algorithm and observed maximum cuts more often than standard QAOA in the recursive procedure developed in Ref.15. TateВ etВ al. also encode semidefinite programming relaxations into the initial state, but not the unitary circuit22. They observed improvement in the approximation ratio relative to standard QAOA for MAX-CUT problems on weighted and unweighted graphs by using WS-QAOA with relaxed solutions obtained by the Burer-Monteiro algorithm. We also mention that a similar warm-start approach has been independently studied in QA23. Meanwhile, it has been reported that WS-QAOA typically shows no improvement if the initial state is strictly a classical string24. In this paper, we examine how the performance of WS-QAOA depends on quality of approximate solutions to make a deep understanding of its efficacy. In Refs.21,22, the authors solved problems with WS-QAOA by acquir- ing approximate solutions by classical algorithms. Meanwhile, it remains unclear how accurate approximate solutions should be for WS-QAOA to outperform QAOA. Here we deduce the ansatz of WS-QAOA starting from QA with a bias field23 and carefully study how the performance of WS-QAOA depends on the quality of approximate solutions by numerical simulations on the MAX-CUT problem. We find out that WS-QAOA shows higher fidelity and approximation ratio than QAOA as the Hamming distance of the approximate solutions to the exact ones becomes smaller. We also reveal that the observation could be partially attributed to the initial state of the ansatz. Finally, we solve the MAX-CUT problem with WS-QAOA after obtaining approximate solutions by QAOA and have higher fidelity and approximation ratio than QAOA especially when the circuit depth is small. The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Sect.В 2, we formulate WS-QAOA in the context of QA. Then, in Sect.В 3, we numerically study the performance of WS-QAOA on the MAX-CUT problem for various approxi- mate solutions in terms of the Hamming distance to the exact solutions as well as for different strengths of the bias field. In Sect.В 4, we solve the MAX-CUT problem by combining WS-QAOA with QAOA and compare its efficacy to QAOA. Finally, in Sect.В 5, we summarize our results. **Formulation MAXвҖ‘CUT problem** As a prototypical combinatorial optimization problem, we consider the MAX-CUT problem, which is known as NP-hard. It is defined on a graph G = (V, E)вҖҠ, where *V* represents a set of vertices, and *E* represents a set of edges between the vertices. We denote the number of vertices in *G* as *n*. The MAX-CUT problem is to find a partition of *V* into two subsets that maximizes the total number of edges between one subset and the other. In a general case that each edge is associated with a real-valued weight wijвҖҠ, one evaluates the weighted sum of those edges. The problem is formulated as maximization of the following objective function \ wij(xi(1 вҲ’xj) + xj(1 вҲ’xi)),
1. C({xi}) =

(i,j)вҲҲE where xi denotes a binary variable associated with vertex *i* (xi = 0, 1)вҖҠ. We note that bit strings {xi} and {xi} (вҖҠxi вүЎ1 вҲ’xiвҖҠ) give the same value of *C*. In the following, we denote {xsol i } and {xsol i } as the single pair of solutions. In the language of physics, the MAX-CUT problem is encoded in finding the ground state of the correspond- ing Ising Hamiltonian, which is obtained by replacing xi for (1 вҲ’Zi)/2 (*Z*: the Pauli *Z* matrix) in the objective function *C* and changing the whole sign. The Hamiltonian reads wij \ 2 ZiZj,
1. HC =

(i,j)вҲҲE where the constant term wij \
1. D = вҲ’

2 (i,j)вҲҲE is left off. **QAOA** QAOA searches for the ground state of the Hamiltonian HC using a QA-inspired ansatz with 2*p* variational parameters for depth *p*8. The ansatz is constructed by alternating applications of the driver operation UC and mixer operation UT to the equal-weight superposition state |+вҠ—nвҖҠ. It is written down with variational parameters ОІs and Оіs (1 вүӨs вүӨp) as **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 2 Vol:.(1234567890)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ p вҹ© UT(ОІs)UC(Оіs)|+вҠ—n. / =
1. \\QAOA

s=1 Here the driver and mixer are defined as UC(Оіs) = eвҲ’iОіsHC and UT(ОІs) = eвҲ’iОІsHTвҖҠ, respectively, where i Xi (*X*: the Pauli *X* matrix) represents a transverse-field term. One can deduce the ansatz \\QAOA HT = вҲ’\ / via the Trotter decomposition of the QA procedure and parametrization of each time step. In QA, the wave function evolves under the Hamiltonian
1. HQA(t) = (1 вҲ’u(t))HT + u(t)HC

with a schedule function *u*(*t*) (вҖҠu(0) = 0 and u(T) = 1). **WSвҖ‘QAOA** QA has had considerable success in solving combinatorial optimization problems9вҖ“11. However, when gap clos- ing occurs during the annealing, it often gets stuck at suboptimal solutions. Reverse QA is an effective variant to circumvent this challenge, which incorporates in the annealing process an approximate solution obtained in advance25. In this procedure, the state adiabatically evolves from the approximate solution at the beginning to the exact solution at the end, driven by quantum fluctuations of a transverse field with a mountain-like time profile. The dynamics is described by the Hamiltonian HRQA(t) = (1 вҲ’t/T)HI + h(t)HT + (t/T)HC (0 вүӨt вүӨT)вҖҠ, where HI yields the approximate solution as the ground state, and *h*(*t*) is a concave function with h(0) = h(T) = 0вҖҠ. It was shown that the performance of reverse QA is largely dominated by the Hamming distance of the approximate solution from the exact one25. Recently GraГҹ23 proposed a similar but simpler QA procedure to make use of an approximate solution, which introduces a longitudinal bias field that favors the approximate solution. The procedure, which we call biased quantum annealing (BQA) hereafter, is governed by the Hamiltonian
1. HBQA(t) = (1 вҲ’u(t))(HT + HL) + u(t)HC,

where HL represents a site-dependent longitudinal field defined as \ / 1 вҲ’2x0 вҹ© Zi.
1. HL = вҲ’Оұ

i i Here x0 i represents the *i*-th bit in the bit string of an approximate solution {x0 i }вҖҠ, and Оұ denotes strength of the bias field. The author numerically showed that BQA achieves higher fidelity than QA in small instances of the exact-cover problem when one prepares approximate solutions that are close enough to the exact solutions in terms of the Hamming distance23. Here we formulate a QAOA version of BQA, which actually corresponds to WS-QAOA21,22. One can derive the ansatz via the Trotter decomposition of BQA under the Hamiltonian HBQA(t) and parametrization of each time step in the same manner as one deduces \\QAOA / from HQA(t)вҖҠ. Then the WS-QAOA ansatz is represented as p / вҹ©
1. \\WSвҲ’QAOA

= UT(ОІs)UL(ОІs)UC(Оіs)|0, s=1 where UL is defined as UL(ОІs) = eвҲ’iОІsHLвҖҠ. The initial state |0 is written down as n вҲ’ПҖ / tanвҲ’1 Оұ } \ 1 вҲ’2x0 вҠ—RY 2 + вҹ© вҹЁ |0.
1. |0 =

i i=1 RY(Оё) = ei(Оё/2)Y (*Y*: the Pauli *Y* matrix) represents a Оё-rotation around the *y*-axis. For Оұ = 0вҖҠ, \\WSвҲ’QAOA cor- / responds to the QAOA ansatz \\QAOA . The WS-QAOA ansatz \\WSвҲ’QAOA is almost identical to that in Ref.21 / / except a small difference in representation of the mixer; the latter implements eвҲ’iОІs(HT+HL) with three layers of rotation gates, whereas the former uses a decomposed form eвҲ’iОІsHTeвҲ’iОІsHL with two layers. **Numerical simulations** In this section, we examine how the WS-QAOA performance varies with choice of approximate solutions {x0 i }вҖҠ. For that purpose, we numerically study the MAX-CUT problem on weighted 3-regular (w3R) graphs13,26. In w3R graphs, each vertex is connected to three others chosen at random, and each edge has weight wij randomly set from [0,В 1). We employ a fast quantum circuit simulator Qulacs27. For optimization of the parameters, we use two methods, random initialization (RI) and an interpolation- based heuristic termed INTERP13. In RI, we take the best sample out of 50 randomizations of the initial values. Given the translational symmetry of the ansatz \\WSвҲ’QAOA , initial values of ОІs are set from [вҲ’ПҖ 4 , ПҖ 4 ) for Оұ = 0вҖҠ, / [вҲ’ПҖ 2 , ПҖ 2 ) for Оұ = 1вҖҠ, and [вҲ’ПҖ, ПҖ) otherwise, whereas those of Оіs are set from [вҲ’2ПҖ, 2ПҖ)вҖҠ. On the other hand, in INTERP, the parameters are optimized incrementally from depth 1 to depth *p*. Here initial values of the param- eters at depth *p*, ОІs[p] and Оіs[p] (1 вүӨs вүӨp)вҖҠ, are uniquely determined via an interpolation of the optimized values \ / at depth p вҲ’1 as ОІs[p] = sвҲ’1 1 вҲ’sвҲ’1 ОІs[p вҲ’1] (вҖҠОІ0[p вҲ’1] = ОІp[p вҲ’1] = 0вҖҠ). It has been pвҲ’1ОІsвҲ’1[p вҲ’1] + pвҲ’1 revealed that INTERP works more efficiently than RI for QAOA on w3R graphs13. In this work, based on our benchmark calculations, we choose a better method, depending on ОұвҖҠ, *p*. For QAOA (вҖҠОұ = 0вҖҠ), we use INTERP. For WS-QAOA, with Оұ = 0.4вҖҠ, we use INTERP, whereas, with Оұ = 1вҖҠ, we use RI at p вүӨ3 and INTERP at p = 4вҖҠ. **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 3 Vol.:(0123456789)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ We note that, regardless of Оұ( = 0)вҖҠ, we use RI when {x0 i } corresponds to the exact solution. In large instances of practical interest where exact solutions are unknown, one would choose either of the methods only according to Оұ and *p*. In both methods, parameters are updated via a gradient descent until the gradient becomes lower than a certain threshold value. In WS-QAOA, we set approximate solutions {x0 i } by flipping *d* bits randomly selected from *n* bits in the solu- tion {xsol i }вҖҠ. In other words, *d* represents the Hamming distance of {x0 i } to {xsol i }вҖҠ. FigureВ 1 show the optimized parameters of QAOA (Оұ = 0)вҖҠ, and WS-QAOA with Оұ = 0.4, 1 for d = 1 on 50 graph instances of n = 10вҖҠ. Fig.В 1a,d show that in QAOA, ОІs (вҖҠОіsвҖҠ) decreases (increases) with *s*, which resembles the process of QA13. We observe a similar trend in WS-QAOA with Оұ = 0.4 in Fig.В 1b, e. Meanwhile, when Оұ = 1вҖҠ, the parameters are not mono- tonic against *s*, which may reflect that the property of QA declines as Оұ becomes larger. Moreover, the optimized parameters do not seem transferable between instances for Оұ = 1 (Fig.В 1c,f) in comparison to those for QAOA (Fig.В 1a,d) and Оұ = 0.4 (Fig.В 1b,e). We think that further studies would be needed on parameter transferability28,29 for WS-QAOA. We compare the performance of WS-QAOA to that of QAOA. As a performance indicator, we use the fidelity of the optimized ansatz \\WSвҲ’QAOA / . We define the fidelity of a wave function | as \ / |2 + | \ / {xsol {xsol |2.
1. F = |

i }| i }| Later, we also discuss our results in terms of approximation ratio, defined as r = вҲ’(|HC| + D)/C({xsol i })вҖҠ. In Fig.В 2a, *F* of WS-QAOA with Оұ = 0.4 at p = 3 is plotted against that of QAOA on 50 graph instances of n = 14вҖҠ.

#### (a)

#### (b)

#### (c)

1.5 0.6 0.6 1.0 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.0 *ОІ* 0.4 *ОІ ОІ* 0.4 вҲ’0.5 0.3 0.3 вҲ’1.0 0.2 0.2 *p* вҲ’1.5 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 *s s s*

#### (d)

#### (e)

#### (f)

2.50 4 2.00 2.25 1.75 2.00 2 1.50 1.75 0 1.25 1.50 *Оі Оі Оі* 1.25 1.00 вҲ’2 1.00 0.75 *p* вҲ’4 0.75 0.50 0.50 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 3 *s s s *FigureВ 1.**вҖӮ вҖүOptimized ОІs and Оіs of (**a**,**d**) QAOA and WS-QAOA with (**b**,**e**) Оұ = 0.4 and (**c**,**f**) Оұ = 1 for d = 1 on 50 instances of w3R graph (вҖҠn = 10вҖҠ). The ansatz depth is p = 3вҖҠ. The parameters are optimized by INTERP in (**a**,**b**,**d**,**e**) and RI in (**c**,**f**). **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 4 Vol:.(1234567890)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

#### (a)

#### (b)

50 1 *d* = 0 7 *d* = 1 6 *d* = 2 40 0.8 *d* = 3 5 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 30 0.6 *F*WS-QAOA 4 *d*hp 3 0.4 20 2 0.2 10 1 0 0 0 0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0 1 2 3 4 5 *F*QAOA *d *FigureВ 2.**вҖӮ вҖүPerformance of WS-QAOA with Оұ = 0.4 at p = 3 on 50 instances of w3R graph (вҖҠn = 14вҖҠ). *d* i }вҖҠ. (**a**) Fidelity of represents the Hamming distance between the approximate solution {x0 i } and exact one {xsol WS-QAOA (вҖҠFWSвҲ’QAOAвҖҠ) versus that of QAOA (вҖҠFQAOAвҖҠ). The dotted line corresponds to FWSвҲ’QAOA = FQAOAвҖҠ. (**b**) Histogram over *d* and dhpвҖҠ. dhp is the Hamming distance of {xhp i } to {xsol i }вҖҠ. The dotted line corresponds to dhp = d. In the following, we focus on Оұ = 0.4, 1вҖҠ. We refer to Sect.В I of SM for a closer look at Оұ dependence. FigureВ 2a indicates that the relative performance of WS-QAOA against QAOA is dominated by the Hamming distance *d*. Importantly, FWSвҲ’QAOA becomes higher as *d* decreases. We find that WS-QAOA outperforms QAOA in all cases for d вүӨ2 and in most cases for d = 3 (Fig.В 2a). We note that FWSвҲ’QAOA is always almost unity for d = 0вҖҠ. The enhanced fidelity with the decrease in *d* has also been observed in BQA23. Success of WS-QAOA with small *d* is also manifested in the bit string with highest probability, {xhp i }вҖҠ, in the optimized ansatz. FigureВ 2b shows the histogram over *d* and the Hamming distance of {xhp i } to {xsol i }вҖҠ, dhpвҖҠ, on 50 instances of n = 14вҖҠ. One can see that the closer the approximate solution is to the exact solution, the more likely {xhp i } is to correspond with the exact solution (вҖҠdhp = 0вҖҠ) (Fig.В 2b). It is notable that for d = 4вҖҠ, the optimized ansatz still yields the solution as the highest-probability string in about a half of the instances. We proceed to study the graph size dependence. In Fig.В 3a,c, the averaged fidelity of WS-QAOA at p = 3 is shown against the number of vertices *n*, together with that of QAOA (вҖҠОұ = 0вҖҠ). FigureВ 3a,c correspond to Оұ = 0.4 and Оұ = 1вҖҠ, respectively. We present the entire data for p = 1 вҲ’4 in Sect.В II of SM. In both WS-QAOA and QAOA, *F* shows a nearly exponential decay with *n*, but importantly it decreases less steeply in WS-QAOA than in QAOA. As a result, with larger *n*, WS-QAOA outperforms QAOA with even larger *d*. We also compare Оұ = 0.4 and Оұ = 1вҖҠ. FigureВ 3a,c indicate that as *d* increases incrementally, fidelity decreases roughly by a constant multiplicative factor (aside from d = 0 вҶ’1вҖҠ) and that the factor is smaller for Оұ = 0.4 than for Оұ = 1вҖҠ. These features seem to stem from the initial state at least in part. In Fig.В 3b,d, we present the fidelity of |0 for Оұ = 0.4 and Оұ = 1вҖҠ, which is derived from Eqs.В (10) and (9) with | = |0 as 4 + tanвҲ’1 Оұ 4 вҲ’tanвҲ’1 Оұ \ПҖ / \ПҖ / cos2(nвҲ’d) F0 = cos2d 2 2 (11) 4 вҲ’tanвҲ’1 Оұ 4 + tanвҲ’1 Оұ \ПҖ / \ПҖ / + cos2d cos2(nвҲ’d) . 2 2 In Fig.В 3b,d, one can observe similar behaviors to Fig.В 3a,c, although the magnitude of the fidelity is significantly improved by the optimized circuit. We also present the *n* dependence of approximation ratio *r* with p = 1 вҲ’4 in Fig.В 4. FigureВ 4aвҖ“d correspond to Оұ = 0.4вҖҠ, and Fig.В 4eвҖ“h to Оұ = 1вҖҠ. As in the case of fidelity *F* (Fig.В 3), WS-QAOA has higher *r* than QAOA when the Hamming distance *d* is sufficiently small. *r* of WS-QAOA also decreases as *d* increases. Notably, *r* of WS-QAOA tends to increase with *n* as opposed to *F*. The calculations above indicate how close approximate solutions should be to the exact solutions for WS- QAOA to outperform QAOA. From the graph size dependence of the fidelity (Fig.В 3a,c, and S2) as well as the approximation ratio (Fig.В 4), we estimate the critical Hamming distance of {x0 i }вҖҠ, dcвҖҠ, which determines whether WS-QAOA outperforms QAOA or not. For example, we estimate dc = 3 for n = 12, Оұ = 0.4 from the fidelity data in Fig.В 3a. FiguresВ 5a and 5b show dc scaled by the graph size *n* for Оұ = 0.4 and Оұ = 1вҖҠ, respectively. The blue **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 5 Vol.:(0123456789)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

##### (a)

##### (b)

0 10 0 10 *d* = 0 *d* = 1 1 10 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 2 10 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 QAOA 3 10 *F F* 1 10 *d* = 0 4 10 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 5 10 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 QAOA 6 10 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n*

##### (c)

##### (d)

0 10 0 10

| d = 0 d = 1 d = 2 d = 3 d = 4 d = 5 QAOA |  | d = 0 d = 1 d = 2 d = 3 d = 4 |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |

*d* = 0 *d* = 1 1 10 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 2 10 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 3 QAOA 10 *F F* 1 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n *FigureВ 3.**вҖӮ вҖү(**a**,**c**) Graph size dependence of the average fidelity obtained by WS-QAOA with different *d* compared to QAOA (вҖҠОұ = 0вҖҠ) for p = 3вҖҠ. (**a**) corresponds to Оұ = 0.4 and (**c**) to Оұ = 1вҖҠ. The fidelity is averaged over 50 instances for n вүӨ14вҖҠ, 20 for n = 16вҖҠ, 15 for n = 18вҖҠ, and 10 for n = 20вҖҠ. The error bar represents standard error of the mean. (**b**,**d**) Calculated fidelity for the initial state of the ansatz, Eq.В (11). (**b**) corresponds to Оұ = 0.4вҖҠ, (**d**) to Оұ = 1 and black lines to QAOA (вҖҠОұ = 0). (red) points represent dc/n for fidelity (approximation ratio). For fidelity, dc/n ranges within [0.2,В 0.3) for Оұ = 0.4вҖҠ, whereas it hovers from 0.1 to 0.25 for Оұ = 1вҖҠ. For approximation ratio, dc/n is smaller, mostly within [0.1,В 0.25) for Оұ = 0.4 and [0.05,В 0.2] for Оұ = 1вҖҠ. The important implication with respect to scalability is that the Hamming distance *d* could be allowed to scale linearly with *n* when *d*/*n* is below those threshold values. We also theoretically derive dc/n for the fidelity of the initial state |0 starting from F0(Оұ) = F0(Оұ = 0) (see Sect.В III of SM), which reads **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 6 Vol:.(1234567890)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ **FigureВ 4.**вҖӮ вҖүGraph size dependence of the approximation ratios of WS-QAOA along with QAOA (**a**вҖ“**d**) Оұ = 0.4 and (**e**-**h**) Оұ = 1вҖҠ. (**a**) and (**e**) correspond to p = 1вҖҠ, (**b**) and (**f**) to p = 2вҖҠ, (**c**) and (**g**) to p = 3вҖҠ, and (**d**) and (**h**) to p = 4вҖҠ. The approximation ratio is averaged over 50 graph instances for n вүӨ14вҖҠ, 20 for n = 16вҖҠ, 15 for n = 18вҖҠ, and 10 for n = 20вҖҠ. The error bar stands for standard 20 20 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 12 12 QAOA QAOA *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 10 10 1.00 0.98 0.96 0.94 0.92 0.90 0.88 1.00 0.98 0.96 0.94 0.92 0.90 0.88 0.86 *r r* (d) (h) 20 20 QAOA *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 12 12 QAOA *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 10 10 1.00 0.98 0.96 0.94 0.92 0.90 0.88 0.86 1.000 0.975 0.950 0.925 0.900 0.875 0.850 0.825 *r* (c) (g) *r* 20 20 QAOA *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 12 12 QAOA *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 10 10 1.000 0.975 0.950 0.925 0.900 0.875 0.850 0.825 1.00 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 (b) *r* (f) *r* 20 20 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 error of the mean. 12 12 QAOA QAOA *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 *d* = 0 *d* = 1 *d* = 2 *d* = 3 *d* = 4 *d* = 5 10 10 1.00 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 (a) (e) *r r *Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 7 Vol.:(0123456789)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ (a) (b)

|  | p = 1 p = 2 p = 3 p = 4 AR p = 1 AR p = 2 AR p = 3 AR p = 4 |
| --- | --- |

|  | p = 1 p = 2 p = 3 p = 4 AR p = 1 AR p = 2 AR p = 3 AR p = 4 |
| --- | --- |

0.35 0.25 0.30 0.20 0.25 *d*c/*n* 0.15 *d*c/*n* 0.20 0.10 0.15 0.05 0.10 0.00 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n *FigureВ 5.**вҖӮ вҖүCritical relative Hamming distance dc/n plotted against *n* for (**a**) Оұ = 0.4 and (**b**) Оұ = 1вҖҠ. The blue points are derived from the fidelity in Fig.В 3a,c, and S2, and red ones are from the approximation ratio in Fig.В 4. When approximate solutions are less-than-dc away from exact solutions, WS-QAOA outperforms QAOA on average. The black line denotes the theoretical value of dc/n estimated for the fidelity of the initial state |0 (see Eq.В (12) in the text). 4 вҲ’tanвҲ’1 Оұ \ cos ПҖ \ ПҖ // log 4 / cos dc 2 n = \ 4 вҲ’tanвҲ’1 Оұ / ПҖ log tan 2 (12) 1 вҲ’sin2n вҹЁ ПҖ \ вҹ© }/ 2 вҲ’tanвҲ’1 Оұ log 1 + + 1 . 4 вҲ’tanвҲ’1 Оұ 2n \ ПҖ / log tan 2 We draw the curve of Eq.В (12) in Figs.В 5. One can see that in both ОұвҖҠ, dc/n estimated from the actual fidelity is smaller than the theoretical curve for the initial state. This indicates that QAOA gains more fidelity by the opti- mized unitary circuit than WS-QAOA. We also study how much or whether WS-QAOA improves approximation ratio as compared to approximate solutions employed in WS-QAOA. FigureВ 6 display the graph size dependence of approximation ratio *r* for WS-QAOA as well as approximate solutions employed {x0 i } with d = 0 вҲ’5вҖҠ. Fig.В 6aвҖ“f correspond to Оұ = 0.4 and Fig.В 6gвҖ“l to Оұ = 1вҖҠ. In most cases, WS-QAOA yields higher approximation ratio on average than approximate solutions for d вүҘ2 with p вүҘ1 (Figs.В 6cвҖ“f, 6iвҖ“l) and d = 1 with p вүҘ2 (Fig.В 6b, 6h). This makes it clear that WS- QAOA helps to improve upon the approximate solutions obtained in advance. Finally, to see the scalability of the methods, we examine the minimal depth *p* that reaches a target approxima- tion ratio, pminвҖҠ. Here we set the target approximation ratio as rt = 0.878вҖҠ, the value guaranteed by the classical Goemans-Williamson algorithm for MAX-CUT problems30. In Figs.В 7a and 7b, we plot pmin as a function of *n* for WS-QAOA with Оұ = 0.4 and Оұ = 1вҖҠ, respectively, along with that for QAOA. FigureВ 7 show that *p* can be smaller for WS-QAOA with d вүӨ1 than for QAOA to reach the target approximation ratio. Meanwhile, since our data are limited to n вүӨ20 and p вүӨ4 due to finite computational resources, it seems difficult to discuss the size dependence for the vanilla and warm-start approaches from Figs.В 7. We expect that one could reveal the scalability by increasing *n* and *p* significantly. **WSвҖ‘QAOA combined withВ QAOA** In the previous section, we studied the dependence of the WS-QAOA performance on approximate solutions and revealed that their Hamming distance to the exact solutions plays a crucial role. In this section, we solve the MAX-CUT problem with WS-QAOA while finding approximate solutions by QAOA. This resembles the approach in the previous study of BQA, where approximate solutions are obtained by QA beforehand23. In Fig.В 8, we depict a flow diagram of our procedure. We call this procedure QAOA+WS hereafter. First, we solve the problem using QAOA and pick up *M* bit strings with highest probabilities, {xm i } (вҖҠm = 0, ..., M вҲ’1вҖҠ), based on the distribution PQAOA from \\QAOA / . Then we conduct WS-QAOA with {xm i } as an approximate solution and obtain the distribution Pm WSвҲ’QAOA from \\WSвҲ’QAOA / . At the end, we obtain the final distribution PQAOA+WS by averaging out *M* distributions Pm WSвҲ’QAOA. We compare the fidelity of QAOA+WS to that of QAOA. The fidelity of QAOA+WS is calculated as the average over the fidelities of *M* runs of WS-QAOA. FiguresВ 9 present fidelities of QAOA+WS with Оұ = 0.4 against those of QAOA over 50 graph instances of n = 20вҖҠ. In Fig.В 9a,b, we set M = 3 and M = 8 for QAOA+WS, respectively. We note that if the exact solutions are included in *M* approximate solutions, we drop them off, considering that **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 8 Vol:.(1234567890)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ (**b**) and (**h**) to d = 1вҖҠ, (**c**) and (**i**) to d = 2вҖҠ, (**d**) and (**j**) to d = 3вҖҠ, (**e**) and (**k**) to d = 4вҖҠ, (**f**) and (**l**) to d = 5вҖҠ. The approximation ratio is averaged over 50 graph instances for n вүӨ14вҖҠ, 20 for n = 16вҖҠ, 15 i } for (**a**вҖ“**f**) Оұ = 0.4 and (**g**вҖ“**l**) Оұ = 1вҖҠ. (**a**) and (**g**) correspond to d = 0вҖҠ, 20 20 18 18 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *i* } 16 *i* } 16 0 0 {*x* {*x n n* 14 14 12 12 10 10 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.55 0.50 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.55 0.50 *r* (f) *r* (l) 20 20 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *i* } *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 0 *i* } 0 {*x* {*x* 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 **FigureВ 6.**вҖӮ вҖүGraph size dependence of the approximation ratios of WS-QAOA as well as approximate solutions employed {x0 12 12 10 10 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.55 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.55 (e) (k) *r r* 20 20 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *i* } 0 *i* } 0 {*x* {*x* 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 12 12 10 10 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.60 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.65 0.60 (d) *r r* (j) for n = 18вҖҠ, and 10 for n = 20вҖҠ. The error bar stands for standard error of the mean. 20 20 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *i* } 0 *i* } 0 {*x* {*x* 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 12 12 10 10 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 0.95 0.90 0.85 0.80 0.75 0.70 (c) (i) *r r* 20 20 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *i* } *i* } 0 0 {*x* {*x* 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 12 12 10 10 0.950 0.925 0.900 0.875 0.850 0.825 0.800 0.950 0.925 0.900 0.875 0.850 0.825 0.800 (b) (h) *r r* 20 20 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *p* = 1 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 4 *i* } *i* } 0 0 {*x* {*x* 18 18 16 16 *n n* 14 14 12 12 10 10 1.000 0.995 0.990 0.985 0.980 0.975 0.970 0.965 1.000 0.999 0.998 0.997 0.996 0.995 0.994 (a) (g) *r r *Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 9 Vol.:(0123456789)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

#### (a)

#### (b)

4 4 3 3 *p*min *p*min 2 *d* = 0 2 *d* = 1 *d* = 0 *d* = 2 *d* = 1 *d* = 3 *d* = 2 *d* = 4 *d* = 3 *d* = 5 *d* = 4 1 QAOA 1 QAOA 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n *FigureВ 7.**вҖӮ вҖүMinimal *p* that reaches the target approximation ratio rt = 0.878 plotted as a function of *n* for WS-QAOA with (**a**) Оұ = 0.4 and (**b**) Оұ = 1. **FigureВ 8.**вҖӮ вҖүFlow diagram of QAOA+WS. d = 0 almost always yields the perfect fidelity (Figs.В 2a, 3a). For M = 3вҖҠ, QAOA+WS shows a sizable variance of the fidelity especially as *p* increases. It shows a better performance for most instances than QAOA at p = 1вҖҠ, but not necessarily at p вүҘ2вҖҠ. Meanwhile, for M = 8вҖҠ, QAOA+WS shows a smaller variance and outperforms QAOA at p вүӨ3 for most instances. Smaller variance with larger *M* seems to be natural, because the approximate solutions are more likely to have a wide range of the Hamming distance to the exact solutions as *M* increases. We also study the graph size dependence. FigureВ 10 present the fidelity of QAOA+WS with Оұ = 0.4 along with that of QAOA plotted against the number of vertices. In Fig.В 10aвҖ“d, we set p = 1 вҲ’4вҖҠ, respectively. The fidelity is averaged over 50 graph instances for n = 10, 12, 14, 20вҖҠ, 20 for n = 16вҖҠ, and 15 for n = 18вҖҠ. Importantly, the fidel- ity decays more slowly with *n* in QAOA+WS than in QAOA for p = 1 вҲ’4 (Fig.В 10). As a result, QAOA+WS on average outperforms QAOA for all *M* as *n* increases; for n вүҘ10 at p = 1вҖҠ, n вүҘ14 at p = 2вҖҠ, n вүҘ16 at p = 3вҖҠ, and n = 20 at p = 4вҖҠ. It should be also mentioned that QAOA+WS becomes more beneficial for smaller *p*, because the difference in the decay with *n* seems to decrease as *p* increases. We also evaluate the performance of QAOA+WS by approximation ratio. As in the fidelity, the approximation ratio *r* for QAOA+WS is estimated by averaging out *r* for *M* runs of WS-QAOA. FigureВ 11aвҖ“d show the graph size dependence of *r* for p = 1 вҲ’4вҖҠ, respectively. QAOA+WS achieves higher *r* than QAOA except for n = 10, p = 4вҖҠ. As in the fidelity (Fig.В 10), the difference in *r* increases with *n* and decreases as *p* increases. It should be noted that *r* of QAOA+WS has a tendency to increase with *n* as opposed to *F* (Fig.В 10). We present the minimal depth for the target approximation quality for QAOA+WS. FigureВ 12 shows pmin for QAOA+WS with M = 1 as well as QAOA as a function of *n* (see Sect.В 3 for the definition of pminвҖҠ). One can **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 10 Vol:.(1234567890)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

#### (a)

#### (b)

0.25 *p* = 1 *p* = 1 0.14 *p* = 2 *p* = 2 *p* = 3 *p* = 3 0.20 0.12 *p* = 4 *p* = 4 0.10 0.15 *F*QAOA +WS *F*QAOA +WS 0.08 0.10 0.06 0.04 0.05 0.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 *F*QAOA *F*QAOA **FigureВ 9.**вҖӮ вҖүFidelity of QAOA+WS versus that of QAOA for 50 instances of n = 20 with (**a**) M = 3 and (**b**) M = 8вҖҠ. For WS-QAOA in QAOA+WS, we set Оұ = 0.4. see that the minimal *p* is smaller for QAOA+WS than for QAOA (Fig.В 12). We note that, as in Fig.В 7, it is hard to discuss the scalability of the results due to the limited range of *n* and *p*. As indicated in Fig.В 12, QAOA+WS needs lower circuit depth to reach certain solution qualities than QAOA. Meanwhile, we should remember that QAOA+WS needs more variational circuits than QAOA, where QAOA+WS involves (M + 1) circuits (вҖҠ2p(M + 1) variational parameters) in comparison to a single circuit (2*p* variational parameters) for QAOA (Fig.В 8). In small instances, one may rather use QAOA than QAOA+WS because pmin might be small enough for QAOA to be reliably executed on current NISQ devices. However, pmin would be much larger for large problems of practical interest. Then one can expect that it would be more important to reduce the circuit depth than the number of variational circuits, considering that circuit fidelity exponentially decreases with depth on NISQ devices due to hardware noise. In such cases, QAOA+WS could be more advantageous than QAOA. It should be mentioned that approximate solutions fed to WS-QAOA can be obtained by classical solvers instead of QAOA as in Refs.21,22. When classical methods give better solution qualities than QAOA, there is not much reason for employing QAOA to obtain approximate solutions. Even when classical methods give solu- tion qualities comparable to QAOA, using classical methods for approximate solutions might be still preferable because it saves quantum resources. In light of these considerations, QAOA+WS would be beneficial in cases that one intends to improve upon QAOA when QAOA already provides better solution qualities than classical methods in the future. **Conclusion** In this work, we systematically studied how the performance of WS-QAOA depends on the quality of approxi- mate solutions by numerical simulations on the MAX-CUT problem on w3R graphs. We found that WS-QAOA yields higher fidelities and approximation ratios than QAOA when one uses approximate solutions that are close enough to the exact solutions in terms of the Hamming distance. More specifically, WS-QAOA with Оұ = 0.4 (вҖҠОұ = 1вҖҠ) produces higher fidelities on average than QAOA if the relative Hamming distance of approximate solu- tions to the exact ones, dc/nвҖҠ, is below 0.2вҖ“0.3 (0.1вҖ“0.25). We also obtained theoretical curves that explain those properties. Furthermore, we showed that QAOA could serve as a capable way to find approximate solutions for WS-QAOA. We found out that WS-QAOA combined with QAOA shows higher fidelity and approximation ratio than QAOA specifically when the depth is limited to a small number. We believe that our findings could allow one to make a clear understanding of the efficacy of WS-QAOA. They might also be helpful to determining the criteria of approximate solutions for WS-QAOA. Lastly, we mention several future studies of interest. In Ref.31, the authors predicted the circuit depth of standard QAOA to reach a certain approximation ratio for various graph symmetries by machine learning technique. It would be interest- ing to extend their results to WS-QAOA and investigate the necessary conditions for the Hamming distance of the approximation solution as well as the circuit depth. In the context of industrial applications, it would be also intriguing to see how our results would look like for more practical optimization problems. **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 11 Vol.:(0123456789)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/

#### (a)

#### (b)

1 10 2 10 *F F M* = 1 *M* = 1 *M* = 3 *M* = 3 *M* = 6 *M* = 6 *M* = 8 *M* = 8 2 10 *M* = 10 *M* = 10 3 QAOA QAOA 10 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n*

#### (c)

#### (d)

1 3 Г— 10 1 2 Г— 10 1 10 1 10 *F F M* = 1 *M* = 1 *M* = 3 *M* = 3 2 *M* = 6 6 Г— 10 *M* = 6 *M* = 8 *M* = 8 *M* = 10 *M* = 10 2 4 Г— 10 QAOA QAOA 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n *FigureВ 10.**вҖӮ вҖүGraph size dependence of the fidelities of QAOA+WS along with QAOA at (**a**вҖ“**d**) p = 1 вҲ’4вҖҠ. The fidelity is averaged over 50 graph instances for n = 10, 12, 14, 20вҖҠ, 20 for n = 16вҖҠ, and 15 for n = 18вҖҠ. For WS-QAOA in QAOA+WS, we set Оұ = 0.4вҖҠ. The error bar represents standard error of the mean. **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 12 Vol:.(1234567890)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ (a) (b) 0.84 0.92 0.83 0.90 0.82 *M* = 1 *M* = 1 0.81 *M* = 3 *M* = 3 *M* = 6 *M* = 6 0.88 0.80 *r M* = 8 *r M* = 8 *M* = 10 *M* = 10 0.79 QAOA QAOA 0.86 0.78 0.77 0.84 0.76 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n* (c) (d) 0.97 0.95 0.96 0.94 0.95 0.93 0.92 0.94 *r r* 0.91 *M* = 1 *M* = 1 0.93 *M* = 3 *M* = 3 0.90 *M* = 6 *M* = 6 0.92 *M* = 8 *M* = 8 0.89 *M* = 10 *M* = 10 0.91 QAOA QAOA 0.88 10 12 14 16 18 20 10 12 14 16 18 20 *n n *FigureВ 11.**вҖӮ вҖүGraph size dependence of the approximation ratios of QAOA+WS along with QAOA at (**a**вҖ“**d**) p = 1 вҲ’4вҖҠ. The approximation ratio *r* is averaged over 50 graph instances for n = 10, 12, 14, 20вҖҠ, 20 for n = 16вҖҠ, and 15 for n = 18вҖҠ. For WS-QAOA in QAOA+WS, we set Оұ = 0.4вҖҠ. The error bar represents standard error of the mean. **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 13 Vol.:(0123456789)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/ **FigureВ 12.**вҖӮ вҖүMinimal depth *p* to reach the target approximation ratio rt = 0.878 plotted as a function of *n* for QAOA+WS with M = 1 and QAOA. **Data availibility** The data generated in this study are available from the corresponding author upon reasonable request. Received: 2 November 2022; Accepted: 19 December 2023 **References**
1. Kjaergaard, M. *et al.* Superconducting qubits: Current state of play. *Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys.* **11**, 369 (2020).
2. Preskill, J. Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond. *Quantum* **2**, 79 (2018).
3. McArdle, S., Endo, S., Aspuru-Guzik, A., Benjamin, S. C. & Yuan, X. Quantum computational chemistry. *Rev. Mod. Phys.* **92**,

015003 (2020).
1. Cerezo, M. *et al.* Variational quantum algorithms. *Nat. Rev. Phys.* **3**, 625 (2021).
2. Bharti, K. *et al.* Noisy intermediate-scale quantum algorithms. *Rev. Mod. Phys.* **94**, 015004 (2022).
3. Peruzzo, A. *et al.* A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor. *Nat. Commun.* **5**, 4213 (2014).
4. McClean, J. R., Romero, J., Babbush, R. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. The theory of variational hybrid quantum-classical algorithms. *New*

*J. Phys.* **18**, 023023 (2016).
1. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., & Gutmann, S. A quantum approximate optimization algorithm. arXiv:1411.4028 (2014).
2. Das, A. & Chakrabarti, B. K. Colloquium: quantum annealing and analog quantum computation. *Rev. Mod. Phys.* **80**, 1061 (2008).
3. Albash, T. & Lidar, D. A. Adiabatic quantum computation. *Rev. Mod. Phys.* **90**, 015002 (2018).
4. Hauke, P., Katzgraber, H. G., Lechner, W., Nishimori, H. & Oliver, W. D. Perspectives of quantum annealing: Methods and imple-

mentations. *Rep. Prog. Phys.* **83**, 054401 (2020).
1. Crooks, G. E. Performance of the quantum approximate optimization algorithm on the maximum cut problem. arXiv:1811.08419

(2018).
1. Zhou, L., Wang, S.-T., Choi, S., Pichler, H. & Lukin, M. D. Quantum approximate optimization algorithm: performance, mechanism,

and implementation on near-term devices. *Phys. Rev. X* **10**, 021067 (2020).
1. Hastings, M. B. Classical and quantum bounded depth approximation algorithms. arXiv:1905.07047 (2019).
2. Bravyi, S., Kliesch, A., Koenig, R. & Tang, E. Obstacles to variational quantum optimization from symmetry protection. *Phys. Rev.*

*Lett.* **125**, 260505 (2020).
1. Farhi, E., Goldstone, J., Gutmann, S., & Neven, H. Quantum algorithms for fixed qubit architectures. arXiv:1703.06199 (2017).
2. Zhu, L. *et al.* Adaptive quantum approximate optimization algorithm for solving combinatorial problems on a quantum computer.

*Phys. Rev. Res.* **4**, 033029 (2022).
1. BГӨrtschi, A., & Eidenbenz, S. Grover mixers for QAOA: Shifting complexity from mixer design to state preparation. In *2020 IEEE*

*International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE)*, 72вҖ“82 (2020).
1. Hadfield, S. *et al.* From the quantum approximate optimization algorithm to a quantum alternating operator ansatz. *Algorithms*

**12**, 34 (2019).
1. Wang, Z., Rubin, N. C., Dominy, J. M. & Rieffel, E. G. XY mixers: analytical and numerical results for the quantum alternating

operator ansatz. *Phys. Rev. A* **101**, 012320 (2020).
1. Egger, D. J., MareДҚek, J. & Woerner, S. Warm-starting quantum optimization. *Quantum* **5**, 479 (2021).
2. Tate, R., Farhadi, M., Herold, C., Mohler, G. & Gupta, S. Bridging classical and quantum with SDP initialized warm-starts for

QAOA. *ACM Trans. Quantum Comput.* **4**, 1 (2023).
1. GraГҹ, T. Quantum annealing with longitudinal bias fields. *Phys. Rev. Lett.* **123**, 120501 (2019).
2. Cain, M., Farhi, E., Gutmann, S., Ranard, D., & Tang, E. The QAOA gets stuck starting from a good classical string. arXiv:2207.

05089 (2022).
1. Perdomo-Ortiz, A., Venegas-Andraca, S. E. & Aspuru-Guzik, A. A study of heuristic guesses for adiabatic quantum computation.

*Quantum Inf. Proc.* **10**, 33 (2011). **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 14 Vol:.(1234567890)

www.nature.com/scientificreports/
1. Amaro, D. *et al.* Filtering variational quantum algorithms for combinatorial optimization. *Quantum Sci. Technol.* **7**, 015021 (2022).
2. Suzuki, Y. *et al.* Qulacs: A fast and versatile quantum circuit simulator for research purpose. *Quantum* **5**, 559 (2021).
3. Galda, A., Liu, X., Lykov, D., Alexeev, Y., & Safro, I. Transferability of optimal QAOA parameters between random graphs. In *2021*

*IEEE International Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE)*, 171вҖ“180 (2021).
1. Shaydulin, R., Lotshaw, P. C., Larson, J., Ostrowski, J. & Humble, T. S. Parameter transfer for quantum approximate optimization

of weighted MaxCut. *ACM Trans. Quantum Comput.* **4**, 1 (2023).
1. Goemans, M. X. & Williamson, D. P. Improved approximation algorithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using

semidefinite programming. *J. ACM* **42**, 1115 (1995).
1. Shaydulin, R., Hadfield, S., Hogg, T. & Safro, I. Classical symmetries and the quantum approximate optimization algorithm.

*Quantum Inf. Process.* **20**, 359 (2021). **Acknowledgements** This work was supported by MEXT via the вҖңProgram for Promoting Researches on the Supercomputer FugakuвҖқ (JP-MXP1020200205) and JSPS KAKENHI via the вҖңGrant-in-Aid for Scientific Research(A)вҖқ Grant Number 21H04553. This work was also supported in part by MEXT Quantum Leap Flagship Program (MEXTQLEAP) Grant No.В JPMXS0120319794. Part of numerical calculation was carried out at the Supercomputer Center, Institute for Solid State Physics, University of Tokyo. **Author contributions** The project was conceived by K.N.O., H.N., and Y.M. K.N.O. wrote the code with help from H.N. and performed numerical simulations. K.N.O. conducted mathematical analyses. All authors actively discussed the results and contributed to preparation of the manuscript. **Competing interests** The authors declare no competing interests. **Additional information Supplementary Information** The online version contains supplementary material available at https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8. **Correspondence** and requests for materials should be addressed to K.N.O. **Reprints and permissions information** is available at www.nature.com/reprints. **PublisherвҖҷs note**вҖӮ Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. **Open Access**вҖӮ This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the articleвҖҷs Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the articleвҖҷs Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. В© The Author(s) 2024 **Scientific Reports** |         (2024) 14:1167  | https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-50406-8 15 Vol.:(0123456789)
