# q-2023-09-26-1121

### Warm-Started QAOA with Custom Mixers Provably

### Converges

### and

### Computationally

### Beats

### Goemans-

### Williamson’s Max-Cut at Low Circuit Depths

Reuben Tate1, Jai Moondra2, Bryan Gard3, Greg Mohler3, and Swati Gupta4 1CCS-3 Information Sciences, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, NM 87544, USA 2Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA 3Georgia Tech Research Institute, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA 4Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

#### arXiv:2112.11354v4  [quant-ph]  19 Sep 2023

**We generalize the Quantum Approxi- gence to Max-Cut, and we show em- mate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA) pirically that our warm-starts achieve of Farhi et al. (2014) to allow for arbi- a faster convergence compared to exist- trary separable initial states with cor- ing approaches. Additionally, our nu- responding mixers such that the start- merical simulations show higher qual- ing state is the most excited state of ity cuts compared to standard QAOA, the mixing Hamiltonian. We demon- the classical Goemans-Williamson algo- strate this version of QAOA, which we rithm, and a warm-started QAOA with- call** *QAOA-warmest***, by simulating Max- out custom mixers for an instance li- Cut on weighted graphs. We initial- brary of 1148 graphs (upto 11 nodes) ize the starting state as a** *warm-start* **us- and depth** *p* = 8**. We further show that ing** 2 **and** 3**-dimensional approximations QAOA-warmest outperforms the stan- obtained using randomized projections dard QAOA of Farhi et al. in experi- of solutions to Max-Cut’s semi-definite ments on current IBM-Q and Quantin- program, and define a warm-start de- uum hardware. pendent** ***custom mixer*****. We show that these warm-starts initialize the QAOA**

##### 1

##### Introduction

**circuit with constant-factor approxima- tions of 0.658 for 2-dimensional and** In order to realize a quantum advantage, **0.585 for 3-dimensional warm-starts for** many researchers have been considering the **graphs with non-negative edge weights,** usage of NISQ devices [1, 2] for the pur- **improving upon previously known triv-** poses of solving difficult problems in com- **ial (i.e., 0.5 for standard initialization)** binatorial optimization. Of particular inter- **worst-case bounds at** *p* = 0**. These** est is the Quantum Approximate Optimiza- **factors in fact lower bound the ap-** tion Algorithm (QAOA), a hybrid quantum- **proximation achieved for Max-Cut at** classical algorithm developed by Farhi et al. **higher circuit depths, since we also show** that can be applied to a large variety of combi- **that QAOA-warmest with any separa-** natorial optimization problems [3]. We study **ble initial state converges to Max-Cut** the use of QAOA to solve one of the most **under the adiabatic limit as** *p →∞***.** famous NP-hard combinatorial optimization **However, the choice of warm-starts sig-** problems, called Max-Cut.*1* Given a weighted **nificantly impacts the rate of conver-** Swati Gupta: email of the corresponding author is *1*Although this work focuses on Max-Cut, our ap- swatig@mit.edu proach can be applied to any suitable combinatorial Accepted in Quantum 2023-08-29, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 1

graph *G* = (*V, E*), with vertex set *V* = [*n*], locally optimal solutions to low-dimensional ) and weights *w* : *E →*R, the edge set *E ⊆*(*V* Burer-Monteiro [6] relaxations of the Max- 2 Max-Cut problem is to find a partition of *V* Cut problem. Using a diverse library of 1148 into two disjoint sets *S, V \ S ⊆V* , such that graphs (up to 11 nodes), we show through nu- the total weight of the edges across the parti- merical simulations that QAOA-warmest that tion, i.e. cut(*S*) := P *e∈E we·***1**[*e ∈S×*(*V \S*)], uses our two types of warm-starts outper- is maximized. The Max-Cut of *G* is denoted forms the classical Goemans-Williamson algo- by Max-Cut(*G*) = max*S⊆V* cut(*S*). rithm and standard QAOA even at low-circuit depths around *p* = 4. Such a low-depth for In the standard QAOA algorithm, qubits are initialized in the *|*+*⟩*state along the *x*- this performance does not hold for any ran- axis of the Bloch sphere, tensorized *n* times, dom initialization on the Bloch sphere. We and QAOA’s mixing Hamiltonian rotates each further tested QAOA-warmest in the presence of noise using Qiskit’s built-in modules and qubit about this same axis. The promise of this approach lies in Farhi et al.’s [3] re- hardware calibration data [7], and on IBM’s sult that establishes a connection between 16-qubit Guadalupe device and Quantinuum’s standard QAOA and quantum adiabatic com- 20-qubit devices. Our simulations demon- puting, showing that with increased circuit strate that QAOA-warmest is robust and still yields high (instance-specific) approximation depth, standard QAOA converges to the Max- Cut. This connection relies on the initial state ratios in such noisy regimes. of standard QAOA being the highest energy Additionally, we provide theoretical perfor- eigenstate of the mixing Hamiltonian. mance guarantees at depth *p* = 0 in the case We propose to initialize the circuit with sep- that projected GW solutions are used. Specif- arable initial states (other than *|*+*⟩⊗n*) gener- ically, for positive-weighted graphs, we show ated using classical relaxations of the Max- (Theorem 2) that, in expectation, the value Cut problem; following classical optimization of the cut obtained from hyperplane round- literature, we refer to these states as *warm-* ing of the projected GW solutions is at least *starts*. We modify the mixing Hamiltonians in 0*.*878 of the optimal cut value (just like GW). the QAOA ansatz in a way dependent on the We further show that quantum measure- initial state, so that the adiabatic assumptions ment of the projected solutions (i.e. depth-0 hold; we call these mixing Hamiltonians *cus-* QAOA-warmest) yields at least a 3 4(0*.*878) *≈ tom mixers*, and call the new QAOA variant 2 0*.*658-approximation and 3(0*.*878) *≈*0*.*585- *QAOA-warmest*. We show that like QAOA, approximation for dimensions *k* = 2 and *k* = QAOA-warmest converges to the Max-Cut 3 respectively. These guarantees also serve with increased circuit depth (Proposition 1). as a lower bound for what can be achieved We further note that the convergence *rate* with higher depth since, like standard QAOA, of QAOA-warmest is heavily dependent on our approach also has monotonically increas- the separable initial state used. In this ing expected cut-quality with increased circuit work, we focus on two approaches for warm- depth for any instance. starting that generate classically-inspired sep- This paper presents the first warm-start ap- arable initial states which (empirically) con- proach for QAOA (for Max-Cut) which simul- verge faster compared to existing initializa- taneously (1) provides a nontrivial constant- tions: (1) low-dimensional projections of op- factor approximation ratio at depth *p* = 0, (2) timal solutions to the Goemans-Williamson satisfies provable convergence to Max-Cut as (GW) semidefinite program (SDP) [5], and (2) circuit depth increases, and (3) enjoys a fast convergence rate, as shown through numeri- optimization problem by converting a generic QUBO cal simulations and experiments on quantum instance into a Max-Cut instance [4], and then apply- hardware. Some of the previous approaches ing the same techniques. This conversion requires only one additional qubit; however, such a conversion is not [8, 9] consider warm-start initializations using necessarily approximation-preserving. perturbations of a single-cut (obtained for ex- 2

ample, using GW algorithm). While such ini- as well: Bravyi et al. [25] show that, for all tializations theoretically yield higher approx- *d ≥*3, there exists a sequence of *d*-regular bi- imation ratio of 0.878 using quantum sam- partite graphs such that depth-*p* QAOA with *p <* (1*/*3 log2 *n −*4)*d−*1 on such instances pro- pling at depth *p* = 0, this warm-start has a much slower convergence rate in simulations duces a cut (in expectation) whose value is at *√* (see Table 1). Therefore, we believe that our most 5 *d−*1 6 + 3*d* , meaning that, in the worst approach is promising for near-term NISQ de- case, constant-depth QAOA for Max-Cut is vices. inferior to the classical Goemans-Williamson *√* Ä5 *d−*1 ä 5 algorithm as lim*d→∞* 6 + = *≈* 3*d* 6 0*.*833 *<* 0*.*878. Farhi et al. [26] show a simi- 1.1 Related Work lar result when QAOA is applied to the Max Independent Set problem*2* and Bravyi et al. Since Farhi et al.’s [3] seminal paper in [27] give similar results for a recursive variant 2014, many have researched and analyzed of QAOA applied to the Max-*k*-Cut problem.*3* the QAOA algorithm. Many empirical stud- Hastings [28] defines a notion of a “local" clas- ies have been performed including the effects sical algorithm and shows that, for triangle- of different parameter initialization strategies free *d*-regular graphs with 2 *≤d ≤*1000, there [10–14], the performance of QAOA in the con- exists*4* a *d*-dependent local classical algorithm text of devices with superconducting qubits for Max-Cut with a provably better approx- with limited connectivity [15–17],the use of imation ratio compared to depth-1 QAOA. machine learning to determine (for specific Marwaha [29] extended this result, showing instances) whether Max-Cut QAOA would that for each 2 *≤d ≤*500, there exists local yield better cuts compared to the classical classical algorithms that yields a better ex- GW algorithm [18], the effectiveness of differ- pected cut compared to depth-2 QAOA for ent encoding schemes for objectives involving all *d*-regular graphs with girth greater than 5. higher-order terms with more than 2 qubits Barak and Marwaha [30] have continued this [19], the effect of various graph properties on line of research, showing that for every one- the performance of QAOA [20], and the use local algorithm (classical or quantum), that of QAOA to generate highly squeezed states *√* 2 + 1*/* 2 the maximum cut achieved is at most 1 which are useful in the context of quantum *d* metrology [21]. of the maximum cut for *d*-regular graphs with girth greater than 5 and that there exists Many researchers have also analyzed QAOA from a more theoretical perspective. Shay- a *k*-local algorithm with approximation ratio 2+ 2*/π* 1 *d −O*( 1 dulin et al. [22] gives a series of results re- *√ k*) for *d*-regular graphs with girth garding the classical symmetries in the objec- greater than 2*k*+1. However, general approx- tive function and how those symmetries are imation guarantees obtained by the QAOA al- reflected in the QAOA dynamics. In their gorithm still remain elusive. seminal paper, Farhi et al. show that depth- The above results also suggest that in order 1 QAOA achieves an approximation ratio of 0.694 for Max-Cut on 3-regular graphs [3]. *2*Given a graph *G* = (*V, E*), the goal of the Max Independent Set problem is to find *S ⊆V* , with *|S|* Wurst and Love show that at depth-2, this as large as possible, such that for all vertices *u, v ∈S*, approximation ratio improves to 0.7559 for the edge (*u, v*) *∈E*. Max-Cut QAOA on 3-regular graphs [23]. For *3*In the Max-*k*-Cut problem, one is given a weighted quantum devices with limited connectivity, graph *G* = (*V, E*) with weights *w* : *E →*R and the Farhi et al. [24] show that a variation of Max- goal is to partition the vertices into *k* disjoint groups Cut QAOA on 3-regular graphs on a device so that the sum of weights of edges across partitions whose native graph is a square grid achieves an is maximized approximation ratio of 0.5293 without the use *4*Numerical evidence suggests that the results of of swap operations. Others have also proven Hastings [28] and Marwaha [29] hold for all *d*; however, no formal proof is given. limitations of the standard QAOA algorithm 3

to realize some kind of quantum advantage, (i.e., each qubit is initialized at *|*0*⟩*or *|*1*⟩*) does more information beyond the standard QAOA not show any improvement in the approxima- algorithm might be needed. Recent work has tion ratio, even when the circuit depth is in- considered modifications and variations of the creased. This result is interesting in the con- QAOA algorithm itself, as in this work, which text of our work, since we find that (1) using we discuss next. custom mixers, one can guarantee convergence as long as the initialization is not at a single- The closest works related to this paper are cut, and (2) warm-starts that are perturba- those by Tate et al. [31] and Egger et al. tions of single-cut initializations (e.g., each [9], where the authors have explored multiple qubit is initialized at *RY* (*θ∗*) *|*0*⟩*or *RY* (*π−θ∗*) approaches for warm-starting QAOA. Tate et for some small *θ∗*where *RY* (*θ*) is a single- al. [31] considered warm-starting QAOA us- qubit rotation about the *y*-axis by angle *θ*) ing 2 and 3-dimensional Burer-Monteiro lo- converge very slowly, in computations, even cally optimal solutions for Max-Cut; how- with custom mixers. Our work therefore com- ever, their method plateaus even at low cir- plements the existing work and clarifies what cuit depths of *p* = 1 for some initializations, kind of warm-starts are useful. and it is unable to improve the cut quality Additionally, other works have explored dif- for some instances. For the Max-Cut prob- ferent kind of modifications of the QAOA lem, Egger et al. [9] constructed the initial ansatz. Farhi et al. [24] considered having quantum state by (non-trivially) mapping a separate variational parameters for each ver- single specific cut (*S, V \ S*) (obtained via tex and edge. Hadfield et al. [32] and Wang et the Goemans-Williamson algorithm or possi- al. [33] considered versions of QAOA that are bly other means) to an initial quantum state. suitable for combinatorial optimization prob- Egger et al. also modified the mixing Hamil- lems with both hard constraints (that must tonian so that at depth *p* = 1 (with the right be satisfied) and soft constraints (for which choice of QAOA variational parameters), the we want to minimize violations). Zhu et al. cut (*S, V \S*) is recovered; however, there is no [34] modify QAOA such that the ansatz is ex- evidence to suggest that such an approach will panded in an iterative fashion with the mix- converge to the optimal solution for depth *p →* ing Hamiltonian being allowed to change be- *∞*. They further proposed a different con- tween iterations. Bravyi et al. [25] proposed tinuous warm-started QAOA for Quadratic a recursive QAOA approach that decreases Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) the instance size at each iteration; Egger et problems, which enjoys convergence guaran- al. [9] also consider a similar recursive ver- tees. For certain classes of QUBO’s, the bi- sion of their approaches. Bärtschi et al. [35] nary variables can be relaxed to be in the and Jiang et al. [36] consider modifications of interval [0*,* 1] to obtain a convex quadratic QAOA inspired by Grover’s (quantum) algo- program whose optimal solution can then be rithm [37] for fast database search. For the mapped to the Bloch sphere. Our mixer is a scope of this work, we do not consider these generalization of the mixer used in this par- alternate approaches; however, it may serve ticular approach by Egger et al.; however, the as an interesting direction for future work as initialization scheme is quite different. In par- QAOA-warmest can likely be used in conjunc- ticular, their continuous warm-started QAOA tion with these other approaches. approach cannot be directly applied to Max- Cut as the corresponding relaxed quadratic program is not convex. 1.2 Background Recent work by Cain et al. [8] further ex- 1.2.1 The Quantum Approximate Optimiza- plored convergence properties of warm-starts, tion Algorithm when augmented with standard mixers. They showed using a perturbative approach that First, we review QAOA in the context of the standard QAOA with single-cut warm-starts Max-Cut problem. QAOA is performed on *n* 4

qubits (with *n* being the number of vertices in Given a solution *x* to the maximization above, the input graph) with the final measurement this yields the cut (*S, V \ S*) with *S* = *{i* : being a bitstring of length *n* corresponding to *xi* = 1*}*. For positive integer *k*, the above a cut (*S, V \ S*) with *S* = *{i* : *i*th bit is 0*}*. formulation can then be relaxed as follows: For depth-*p* QAOA, the quantum circuit alternates between applying a cost Hamilto- 1 X *wij∥xi −xj∥*2 max (3) 1 (*i,j*)*∈E wij*(1 *−σz i σz* nian *HC* = P *j* ) and a 4 2 *i∈*[*n*] *σx* (*i,j*)*∈E* mixing Hamiltonian *HB* = P *i* . Here, *σx, σy, σz* are the standard Pauli operators subject to *∥xi∥*= 1*, ∀i ∈V,* and *σk i* is the Pauli operator applied to qubit *i xi ∈*R*k, ∀i ∈V.* for *k ∈{x, y, z}*. The cost and mixing Hamil- When *k* = *n*, the problem can be reformu- tonians are applied a total of *p* times to gen- erate a variational state, lated as a convex semidefinite program (SDP) which is the formulation used by the sem- *|ψp*(*γ, β*)*⟩* (1) inal Goemans-Williamson (GW) algorithm = *e−iβpHBe−iγpHC· · · e−iβ*1*HBe−iγ*1*HC|s*0*⟩,* [5], which yields a 0.878-approximation to Max-Cut for graphs with non-negative edge where *|s*0*⟩*is the initial state and *γ* = weights. (*γ*1*, . . . , γp*)*, β* = (*β*1*, . . . , βp*) are variational Burer and Monteiro proposed solving the parameters to be optimized. For standard relaxation for 1 *< k < n* (which we de- QAOA, the initial state is given by *|s*0*⟩*= *|*+*⟩⊗n* which corresponds to an equal super- note by BM-MC*k*), using parametric forms position of all 2*n* possible cuts in the graph. for points on the *k −*1-dimensional sphere [6]. This leads to a program that is no longer Finally, sampling from *|ψp*(*γ, β*)*⟩*yields a convex and thus one can not expect to eas- bit-string corresponding to a cut in the graph. ily find the global optima. However, high- We let *Fp*(*γ, β*) denote the expected cut value quality local optima can be found by utiliz- from sampling *|ψp*(*γ, β*)*⟩*, i.e., ing first and second order optimization meth- *Fp*(*γ, β*) = *⟨ψp*(*γ, β*)*| HC |ψp*(*γ, β*)*⟩.* ods. In general, the Burer-Monteiro tech- nique has been found to work well in prac- If, for each *p*, we choose *γ, β* optimally, then tice, even when *k* = 2 [38]; however, in the- the expected value of the cut tends to the ory, Mei et al. [39] show that hyperplane Max-Cut as *p →∞*[3]. rounding of a locally optimal BM-MC*k* solu- In practice, the optimal choice of *γ, β* is un- 1 tion achieves a 0*.*878(1 *− k−*1) fraction of the known in advance and thus a hybrid classical- optimal cut, yielding a 0-approximation and quantum hybrid loop is often used to find val- a 0*.*439-approximation for dimensions *k* = 2 ues of *γ* and *β* that yield high expectation val- and *k* = 3 respectively. ues. The initialization of *γ* and *β* in these op- For ease of notation, given a (feasible) BM- timization routines has been investigated [10– MC*k* solution *x*, we let 14]; however, for simplicity, we initialize *γ* and *β* near the origin for our experiments as dis- 1 X HP(*x*) = *π* arccos(*xi · xj*)*,* cussed in Section 4. (*i,j*)*∈E* 1.2.2 Classical Optimization Algorithms denote the expected cut value obtained from performing hyperplane rounding on *x* [5] and We next review some classical optimization al- we let gorithms for Max-Cut. It is useful to reformu- 1 late the Max-Cut problem as follows: 4*∥xi −xj∥*2*,* BM-MC*k*(*x*) = X Max-Cut(*G*) = 1 (*i,j*)*∈E* X *wij*(*xi −xj*)2*.* max 4 *x∈{±*1*}n* denote the BM-MC*k* objective at *x*. Lastly, (*i,j*)*∈E* (2) we say that the solution *x* is *κ*-approximate 5

if HP(*x*) *≥ κ*Max-Cut(*G*) and similarly, proposed by Tate et al. [31], which uses the *i∈*[*n*] *σx x* is considered *κ*-close if BM-MC*k*(*x*) *≥* standard mixer, *HB* = P *i* , together *κ*Max-Cut(*G*). with a separable quantum initial state). Consider a separable state *|s*0*⟩*on *n* qubits; if the *j*th qubit’s Cartesian coordinates on the 1.2.3 Approximation Ratio Bloch sphere are given by (*xj, yj, zj*), then For this work, we adopt the same definition the corresponding custom mixing Hamiltonian and notation for the (instance-specific) ap- *HB* is given by, proximation ratio (AR) as discussed in Tate *n* et al. [31]. Specifically, for a graph *G* and al- M *HB* = *HB,j,* (5) gorithm *A*, the (instance-specific) AR is given *j*=1 by, where *HB,j* = *xjσx* + *yjσy* + *zjσz*. *EA,G −*Min-Cut(G) *αA,G* = Max-Cut(*G*) *−*Min-Cut(G); (4) Geometrically, the custom mixer rotates qubits about their original position on the Bloch sphere (details included in Appendix where *EA,G* is the expected cut value (either B). Note that the standard mixers in QAOA from hyperplane rounding of a classical so- [3] are, therefore, a special case of our cus- lution or quantum measurement of a quan- tum state) and Min-Cut(G) is the (possi- tom mixers since each qubit is initialized at *|*+*⟩*, i.e., the the *x*-axis (with Cartesian coor- bly trivial) minimum cut in the graph *G*. dinates (*xj, yj, zj*) = (1*,* 0*,* 0)) and the unitary This definition is chosen as a means of “nor- operator *e−iβkHB* for the mixer corresponds to malizing" the approximation ratio to lie in rotations (by 2*βk*) about the *x*-axis. When the the interval [0*,* 1], even in the case of graphs initial state is composed by qubits restricted with both positive and negative edge weights. to the *xz*-plane with *x >* 0, then this custom For positive-weighted graphs, we have that Min-Cut(G) = 0, in which case, the defi- mixer recovers the one considered by Egger et al [9]. nition of *αA,G* reduces to the “typical" defini- tion of approximation ratio often seen in the classical optimization literature. The worst- 2.1 Convergence to Max-Cut case AR *αA* for an algorithm *A* is defined as In this section, we show that the expected the worst instance-specific AR across all in- cut obtained by QAOA-warmest converges to stances, i.e., *αA* = min*G αA,G*; alternatively, Max-Cut as the circuit depth goes to infinity. we say such an algorithm *A* provides an *αA*- approximation. **Theorem 1.** *Let |s*0*⟩be any separable initial* It should be noted that in our numerical *state whose qubits do not lie at the poles of the* simulations, we can calculate *EA,G* exactly. *Bloch sphere. Running QAOA with a warm-* Please refer to [31] for more details. *start |s*0*⟩, its corresponding custom mixer* (5)*, with the choice of optimal variational param-*

##### 2

##### Custom Mixers

*eters, yields a distribution of cuts whose ex- pected value reaches Max-Cut as the circuit* In this section, we provide a general frame- *depth p tends to infinity, i.e.,* work that shows, for *any* separable initial *p→∞*max lim *γ,β Fp*(*γ, β*) = *Max-Cut*(*G*)*.* state, how to construct a custom mixing Hamiltonian for QAOA so that the warm- start is the most excited state of the mixer. We will first show that Theorem 1 holds This property will be useful in showing con- when the warm-start is initialized in the *xz*- vergence results for QAOA with custom mix- plane of the Bloch sphere, with *x >* 0. We will ers. We refer to such variants of QAOA as then show the main result by showing equiv- QAOA-warmest (compared to QAOA-warm, alence of the distribution of cuts obtained by 6

QAOA-warmest when a phase is added to each **Proposition 2.** *Let |s*0*⟩be any separable ini-* qubit (i.e., the initial state is not restricted to *tial state and let HB be its corresponding cus- Let |s′* 0 phase). *tom mixer.* 0*⟩be the state |s*0*⟩where each qubit’s phase is set to 0, and let H′ B *Proposition 1.** *Let |s*0*⟩be any separable ini- be the corresponding custom mixer. Then, tial state such that all qubits lie at the inter- for any fixed choice of variational parame- section of the Bloch sphere and the xz-plane ters* (*γ, β*)*, the distribution of cuts obtained with positive x-coordinate. Running QAOA from QAOA-warmest with initial state |s*0*⟩ with initial state |s*0*⟩and its corresponding and mixer HB is the same as the distribution custom mixer yields that of cuts from obtained QAOA-warmest with initial state |s′* 0*⟩and mixer H′ B. p→∞*max lim *γ,β Fp*(*γ, β*) = *Max-Cut*(*G*)*,* Proposition 2 can be proved by first decom- posing the general custom mixer (correspond- *i.e., the expected cut value of QAOA-warmest* ing to *|s*0*⟩*) in terms of the custom mixer cor- *with optimal variational parameters will yield* responding to the initial state with the phase *the optimal cut value as the circuit depth p* removed (i.e. *|s′* 0*⟩*). Using this decomposition, *tends to infinity.* we show that any effect caused by the change in rotation direction (due to switching from Egger et al. [9] use the same custom mixers*5* the custom mixer for *|s′* 0*⟩*to the custom mixer for warm-starts restricted to the *xz*-plane with for *|s*0*⟩*) exactly cancels out with the effect of *x >* 0, for convex quadratic programs, and introducing a phase to *|s′* 0*⟩*to obtain *|s*0*⟩*. The state that convergence holds, without proof. details of the proof can be found in Appendix While straightforward calculations show that A. the initial state is the highest-energy eigen- The convergence given by Theorem 1 for state of the mixer (a condition needed in order QAOA-warmest is especially interesting con- to apply the adiabatic theorem and guarantee sidering that many previous warm-started convergence), a complete proof requires care- QAOA approaches lack such guarantees. The ful inspection of the eigenvalues of the time- QAOA-warm approach by Tate et al. [31] con- dependent Hamiltonian *H*(*t*) = (1*−t/T*)*HB*+ sidered arbitrary separable states but with the (*t/T*)*HC*. We show that there is a non-zero standard mixer; they showed examples where gap between the largest and the second largest QAOA-warm plateaued and did not converge eigenvalues of the time-varying Hamiltonian, to the Max-Cut. Cain et al. [8] considered using the Perron-Frobenius theorem for irre- the case where the initialization is a single ducible stoquastic Hermitian matrices. These bitstring/cut with the standard mixer, and details can be found in Appendix C. showed that such an initialization also does This analysis can not be directly applied not converge to Max-Cut. One of the ap- for arbitrary separable states since the corre- proaches by Egger et al. consider a mixer that sponding mixers do not necessarily have real is neither the standard mixer nor the custom entries, and therefore, the Perron-Frobenius mixer approach presented above. Their mixer theorem cannot be applied. However, instead is used in conjunction with what we call a per- of calculating the eigenvalue gaps directly, we turbed single-cut initialization (see Section 3) show that the phase in the warm-start is not which recovers a *particular* cut (obtained via reflected in the distribution of cuts obtained GW or other means) at depth 1. However, using QAOA-warmest, which would then com- this initialization comes with no guarantees on plete the proof of Theorem 1. convergence, and our results also do not apply to these different mixers. *5*Although [9] use the same construction of the Although Theorem 1 applies to any warm- mixer, they use significantly different warm-starts, which ultimately play a role in the rate of convergence start with aligned custom mixers, we will show of the overall approach. that there is a significant difference in the *rate* 7

of convergence to Max-Cut which depends on that were at least as good as those obtained the type of warm-start chosen. Theoretically by GW [38]. characterizing this rate of convergence still re- Lastly, we compare the two warm-start mains an open question, but we show that techniques above to perturbed single-cut ini- there is a stark observable difference in rate tializations, another warm-start technique of convergence through numerical simulations that has been considered in previous litera- (See Table 3 for a summary, and Section 4.2 ture [8, 9]. We show that, theoretically, such for more details). We discuss the choice of initializations give better depth-0 guarantees warm-starts next. for QAOA (compared to the two warm-start techniques previously discussed); however, we later show (Section 4) that such initializations

##### 3

##### Warm-Starts

yield a comparatively much slower rate of con- vergence with increased circuit depth. We now discuss the notion of warm-starting the quantum circuit for QAOA by biasing the 3.1 SDP-based Relaxations initial quantum state *|s*0*⟩*in Equation (1) to certain cuts, as opposed to taking an equal su- Recall that a solution to the Goemans- perposition of all cuts as in standard QAOA. Williamson (GW) SDP relaxation consists of Many initialization schemes have been used *n* unit vectors *{ui ∈*R*n* : *i ∈V }*, and their for warm-starting QAOA (see Table 1 for a rounding algorithm uses a random hyperplane summary); we focus on two that produce clas- to obtain an approximation for the Max-Cut sical solutions which can easily be mapped to a on the given graph *G*. We propose to create separable quantum state in a way that roughly a warm-start to QAOA by instead rounding approximates the corresponding classical dis- each of these vectors to R*k* (with *k ∈{*2*,* 3*}*) tribution of cuts. and then mapping the rounded vectors to the Both approaches consider the *k*-dimensional Bloch sphere.*6* relaxation (3) for Max-Cut. When *k* = *n*, this Specifically, given *u ∈*R*n* for some positive is the GW semidefinite program. Recall that integer *n*, and a linear subspace *A* of R*n*, let the Goemans-Williamson algorithm [5] rounds Π*A*(*u*) denote the (Euclidean) projection of *u* an optimal solution *u*1*, . . . , un ∈*R*n* to this on *A*. Given Π*A*(*u*)*̸* = 0, define SDP to a cut *v*1*, . . . , vn ∈{−*1*,* 1*}* using a ran- dom hyperplane. Since we wish to produce Π*A*(*u*) Λ*A*(*u*) = *,* a separable quantum state, we instead round *∥*Π*A*(*u*)*∥*2 *u*1*, . . . , un ∈*R*n* to vectors *v*1*, . . . , vn ∈*R*k*, as the *unit-scale* projection of *u* on *A*. This *k ∈{*2*,* 3*}* and map these to the Bloch sphere corresponds to normalizing Π*A*(*u*) so it is a for each of the *n* qubits. unit vector. Alternately, we can solve the relaxation it- To motivate warm-starts using solutions for self for *k ∈{*2*,* 3*}* [6], and map the locally- the Goemans-Williamson SDP, consider the optimal solution vectors (called BM-MC so- following two-step process for rounding an op- lutions) directly to the corresponding Bloch timal SDP solution *{ui* : *i ∈*[*n*]*}* to a cut: spheres. While BM-MC solutions do not en- joy even the trivial 0.5-approximation guaran-
- Choose a uniformly random linear sub-

tees [39], they are much faster to compute in space *A* of R*n* of dimension *k ∈{*2*,* 3*}*, practice and therefore scale better for larger and consider the unit-scale projections graphs: e.g., Burer et al. [38] show that GW Λ*A*(*ui*) *∈*R*k, i ∈*[*n*]. took over 1.5 days to complete on a 20,000 node instance, whereas a *k* = 2 BM-MC so- *6*An iterative rounding of the SDP solution was in- lution was found in a little over a second; re- dependently shown by Parekh and Thompson, a cou- peated runs of BM-MC2 over the course of a ple of months before our update on arXiv, for a more general setting of the Quantum Max-Cut [40]. couple minutes on the same graph yielded cuts 8

| Initializations | Mixers | Citation | Worst case AR at p = 0 | Converges to Max-Cut? | Comment |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Equal | Standard mixer | [3] | 0.5 | Yes | Standard and custom mixers are |
|  | Custom mixer |  |  |  |  |
| BM-MCk | Standard mixer (QAOA-warm) | [31] | 0 (k = 2) 0.333 (k = 3) | No | equivalent for this initialization |
|  | Custom mixers (QAOA-warmest) | This work | 0 (k = 2) 0.333 (k = 3) | Yes | Converges quickly (see Section 4.2) |
| Projected GW | Standard mixer (QAOA-warm) | This work | 0.658 (k = 2), 0.585 (k = 3), (Corollary 3) | No |  |
|  | Custom mixers (QAOA-warmest) | This work | 0.658 (k = 2), 0.585 (k = 3), (Corollary 3) | Yes | Converges quickly (see Section 4.2) |
| Perturbed Single Cut (with regularization angle θ∗) | Standard mixer (QAOA-warm) | [8] (θ∗= 0) case | 0.878 cos2n(θ∗/2), (Observation 4) | No |  |
|  | Custom mixers (QAOA-warmest) | Appendix I of [9] | 0.878 cos2n(θ∗/2), (Observation 4) | Yes | Converges slowly for small θ∗ (see Section 4.2) |
|  | Other custom mixers | Section 2.3 of [9] | 0.878 | No | AR result occurs at (γ1, β1) = (0, π/2) |

Table 1: A summary of results for different variants of QAOA (for Max-Cut) based on various combinations of initializa- tions (equal superposition, BM-MC*k*, projected GW, and perturbed single-cut initializations) and mixing Hamiltonian (standard, custom mixers (Section 2), and the mixer proposed by Egger et al. [9] for perturbed single-cut initializa- tions). For various combinations, we state what is known regarding the convergence and worst-case approximation ratio (for depths *p ≥*0) of the corresponding QAOA variant for graphs with non-negative edge weights.
- Use

Goemans-Williams hyperplane *2. Furthermore, the two-step rounding pro-* rounding on vectors Λ*A*(*ui*)*, i ∈*[*n*] to *cedures produces a cut of value* (0*.*878*−ϵ*) get a (random) cut *M′ times the Max-Cut value* with high prob- log *n* ability *if performed independently* That is, round the vectors *ui ∈*R*n*, *i ∈ ϵ times for any constant ϵ ∈*(0*,* 1*/*2)*. Fur-* [*n*] to a random *k*-dimensional subspace first, *ther, if A*1*, . . . , A* log *n are the interme-* and then subsequently use the Goemans- *ϵ diate k-dimensional subspaces in these* Williamson hyperplane rounding on these *k*- log *n runs, there is at least some Ai (with* dimensional vectors. *ϵ high probability) such that performing the* The following theorem shows that this two- *hyperplane rounding on Ai produces a* step rounding is equivalent to the Goemans- *(random) cut of average value at least* Williamson hyperplane rounding on vectors (0*.*878 *−ϵ*) *times the Max-Cut. ui*, *i ∈*[*n*]; we include the proof in Appendix A. The last part of Theorem 2 illustrates that **Theorem 2.** *Suppose we are given unit vec- tors u*1*, . . . , un ∈*R*n that form an optimal* we can obtain a high-quality *k*-dimensional projected GW solution in regards to hyper- *solution to the SDP relaxation for Max-Cut* plane rounding; however, it is natural to ask *on some graph G* = (*V, E*) *with n vertices* if any kind of guarantee can be preserved when *and non-negative weights on the edges. Sup-* mapping the solution to a quantum state. By *pose the GW random hyperplane rounding* adapting a theorem by Tate et al. [31], we can *on u*1*, . . . , un obtains a (random) cut M of* answer the question in the affirmative as seen *value X, and the two-step rounding described above produces a (random) cut M′ of value Y .* in Corollary 3 below. *Then, 1. The random variables X* = *Y . In *Corollary 3.** *Let G be a graph with non- particular,* E(*X*) E(*Y* ) *and there-* = *negative edge weights and let x be a corre- fore, in expectation, M′ provides a* 0*.*878*- sponding κ-approximate projected GW solu- tion in* R3 *with respect to hyperplane round- approximation to Max-Cut on G.* 9

*ing.7 Let RU*(*x*) *denote random uniform rota-* jected GW solutions, we use the same rota- *tion applied to x, i.e., a global rotation where* tion and quantum-mapping scheme to obtain *a uniformly selected point on the sphere gets* an unentangled initial quantum state. *mapped to* (0*,* 0*,* 1)*. Then initialization of* Theorem 2 of Tate et al. [31] shows that *QAOA with RU*(*x*) *has an (worst-case) ap-* the same approximation ratios of 3 4*κ* and 2 3*κ proximation ratio of* 2 3*κ at p* = 0*, i.e., only* (for *k* = 2 and *k* = 3 solutions respec- *using quantum sampling with initial state cre-* tively) can be achieved for depth-0 QAOA- *ation and no algorithmic depth for QAOA.* warmest if the solution is instead *κ*-close, i.e., *Similarly, if x is a κ-approximate projected* BM-MC*k*(*x∗*) *≥κ*Max-Cut(*G*). Using the *GW solution in* R2*, initialization of QAOA* same analysis as Goemans and Williamson [5], 3 *with RU*(*x*) *is a* 4*κ-approximate solution at* it is straightforward to show that a *κ*-close so- *p* = 0*.* lution must also be 0*.*878*κ*-approximate (i.e. *If x is chosen such that it is κ-approximate* HP(*x*) *≥*0*.*878*κ*Max-Cut(*G*)). For locally optimal*9* BM-MC*k* solutions, Mei et al. [39] *with κ* = 0*.*878 *−ε (such an x is easily found via Theorem 2), then, for small ε, this yields* shows that such solutions are *κ*-close (and 1 *(worst-case) approximation ratios (for depth-* hence 0*.*878*κ*-approximate) with *κ* = 1 *− k−*1; 3 *0 QAOA-warmest) of* 4(0*.*878 *−ε*) *≈*0*.*658 thus, hyperplane rounding of such solutions *and* 2 yields (worst-case) approximation ratios of 3(0*.*878 *−ε*) *≈*0*.*585 *for 2-dimensional* ) = 0*.*439 while 0*.*878(0) = 0 and 0*.*878 ( 1 *and 3-dimensional projections respectively.* 2 depth-0 QAOA-warmest can obtain (worst- A proof of Corollary*8* 3 can be found in Ap- case) approximation ratios of 3 4 (0) = 0 and ) = 1 ( 1 pendix A. This motivates us to use the pro- 2 3 for *k* = 2 and *k* = 3 solutions re- 3 2 jected vectors Λ*A*(*ui*)*, i ∈*[*n*] to warm-start spectively. QAOA. We then use the same scheme as pro- Experiments in Appendix F.3 compare posed by Tate et al. [31] to rotate and map the (instance-specific) approximation ratios the solution *x∗*= *{*Λ*A*(*ui*)*}i∈*[*n*] to the Bloch achieved by hyperplane rounding of both sphere. More specifically, we first perform ei- types of warm-start initializations discussed; ther (1) a random vertex-at-top rotation of in particular, projected GW SDP solutions do *x∗*(a global rotation to *x∗*so that a random well (compared to *n*-dimensional GW SDP so- vertex *v* coincides with (0,0,1)) or (2) a uni- lutions) but approximate BM-MC*k* solutions formly random rotation *RU*, and apply the degrade in performance as the number of natural mapping from the rotated solution to nodes increases. the Bloch sphere to obtain a separable, unen- tangled state *|s*0*⟩*[31]. Figure 1 illustrates the 3.3 Perturbed Single Cut Initializations two-step rounding procedure and this warm- start. For the purposes of comparison in our numer- ical simulations (Section 4), we briefly review one more type of warm-start which we refer 3.2 Burer-Monteiro’s Relaxation to as perturbed single-cut initializations that For faster computational performance, we find other researchers [8, 9] have used for QAOA; a warm-start by using a locally optimal *k*- more details regarding this approach can be dimensional solution *x∗*(with *k ∈{*2*,* 3*}*) ob- tained by the Burer-Monteiro relaxation for *9*When *x∗*is a globally optimal BM-MC*k* solution, it immediately follows that *x∗*is 1-close and 0*.*878- Max-Cut on a (*k −*1)-sphere. Similar to pro- approximate and hence (worst-case) approximation ratios of 3 4 and 2 3 (for *k* = 2 and *k* = 3 solutions re- *7*The theorem also holds more generally for any fea- spectively) are achieved for depth-0 QAOA-warmest; sible BM-MC2 or BM-MC3 solution. however, since the Burer-Monteiro relaxation is non- *8*Note that Theorem 2 in [31] works with the as- convex, finding such globally optimal solutions be- sumption that *x* is *κ*-close whereas Corollary 3 as- comes intractable, especially as the number of nodes sumes that *x* is *κ*-approximate (see Section 1.2.2). increases. 10

Goemans-Williamson hyperplane rounding I

## . . .

SDP Random R*n* R*k* R1 solution Cut II II, III Random hyperplane *k*-dimensional rounding rounding Rotation III Initial III Cut state QAOA Figure 1: A schematic for GW warm-starts. There are three procedures to obtain a cut from an SDP solution. The first is to use Goemans-Williamson hyperplane rounding (on the top labelled I). The second (labelled II) is to do a two-step rounding through an intermediate state in R*k, k ∈{*2*,* 3*}*. We prove that this two-step rounding procedure is equivalent to Goemans-Willimson hyperplane rounding in Theorem 2. The third procedure is our proposed warm-start of QAOA using the SDP solution (highlighted in blue, labelled III). This procedure involves rounding the SDP solution to R*k* first, then rotating this solution using uniform or vertex-at-top rotations and mapping to the Bloch sphere to get an initial state for QAOA, and finally running QAOA on this initial state. found in (Appendix D). Given a regulariza- It is easy to see that such warm-starts ap- tion angle *θ∗∈*[0*, π/*2] and a cut (*S, V \ S*), proach an approximation ratio (at *p* = 0) of one can initialize the initial quantum state so 0.878, when initialized randomly with the dis- that qubits lie along the *xz*-plane of the Bloch tribution of cuts obtained using the Goemans- sphere with vertices in *S* and *V \ S* being ini- Williamson algorithm, as the regularization tialized at an angle *θ∗*away from the north angle *θ∗*approaches zero. We discuss a proof and south poles of the Bloch sphere respec- in the Appendix A to show this. Although tively; such a regularization angle aims to cir- Proposition 4 suggests it may be the superior cumvent issues regarding reachability[9].*10* warm-start technique for small regularization angle *θ∗*; convergence is either lacking or slow Though not stated in the related works, if the warm-starts are initialized close to single- empirically depending on the mixer used (see Table 1). cuts, then they retain the classical approxima- tion factors of the respective single-cut:

##### 4

##### Numerical Simulations and Ex-

**Observation 4.** *Let G* = (*V, E*) *be a graph, and suppose a cut* (*S, V \ S*) *is an*

##### periments

*α-approximation to Max-Cut*(*G*)*, and is used to initialize a warm-start using regularization* In this section, we demonstrate the impor- *angle of θ∗∈*[0*, π/*2]*. Then, a quantum* tance of using a suitable warm-start and show *measurement (i.e. depth-0 QAOA) of this* that with such warm-starts, QAOA-warmest *state yields an approximation ratio of at least* outperforms the Goemans-Williamson Max- *α ·* cos(*θ∗/*2)2*|V |.* Cut algorithm as well as standard QAOA [3] and QAOA-warm [31]. In particular, we show *10*It can be shown that if the initial qubit position that QAOA-warmest does at least as well as lies on the poles of the Bloch sphere, e.g. if the initial these other algorithms at depths *p ≥*4 for qubit position is *|*0*⟩*(north pole), then it is guaranteed nearly every instance in our instance library. that that qubit will be measured to be *|*0*⟩*as the end of the QAOA algorithm if custom mixers (as described We consider comparisons with respect to a re- in Section 2) are used. cent warm-starts approach of Egger et al. [9] 11

in Appendix F. the BM-MC2 objective value). We do the As discussed earlier (Section 3), for positive- same for BM-MC3. Similarly, for each in- weighted graphs, perturbed single-cut initial- stance, we solve the GW SDP, perform 5 pro- izations have better depth-0 guarantees com- jections to random 2-dimensional subspaces, pared to the projected GW warm-starts that and keep the best (in terms of the BM-MC2 we propose. While possibly more advanta- objective); this process is repeated (using the geous at extremely low depths (*p* = 0*,* 1), we same GW SDP solution) with projections to show that QAOA with perturbed single-cut 3-dimensional subspaces. Next, for both the initializations empirically converge to an op- best BM-MC2 and best BM-MC3 solution, timal cut very slowly with increased circuit and for both of the best projected GW so- depth; for small enough regularization angle lutions (in 2 and 3 dimensions), we perform *θ∗*, the convergence towards an optimal cut 5 different vertex-at-top rotations and 5 dif- is not even perceivable at the circuit depths ferent uniform rotations, yielding 40 differ- tested. Meanwhile, with suitable warm-starts, ent initial warm-started quantum states per the convergence is much quicker: for over 98% instance. We run QAOA-warm and QAOA- of instances tested, we found that depth-8 warmest using all 40 of these warm-started QAOA-warmest with BM-MC2 initializations states and, for each combination of dimension yields nearly optimal cuts. and rotation scheme, record which one per- Lastly, we consider the effects of noise on formed the best in terms of (instance-specific) QAOA and its variants in the context of actual approximation ratio (as defined in Section quantum devices (i.e. the IBM-Q Guadalupe 1.2.3). Finally, we run standard QAOA on and Quantinuum H1-1 devices). We show that the instance. for QAOA and its variants, the noise from For each run for each variant of QAOA, we these devices flattens the landscape without initialize the variational parameters *γ* and *β* close to zero*12* and each run terminates when significantly altering the location of local ex- trema. Additionally, we show that even with the difference in successive values of *Fp*(*γ, β*) noise, QAOA-warmest (with suitable warm- in the optimization loop is less than ¯*W ×*10*−*6 start) maintains a significant fraction of its ex- where ¯*W* is the sum of the absolute values of pected solution quality, which suggests it may the edge weights. be useful for near-term NISQ devices (poten- To simplify the results, the figures and ta- tially with some noise mitigation) [1]. bles in this section will only consider runs of QAOA-warmest that use BM-MC2 initializa- 4.1 Simulation Details tions with vertex-at-top rotations. This choice is due to runtime considerations and to allow For our simulations, we use the CI-QuBe library*11* [41] which contains graphs up to for easier comparisons with previous related literature [9, 31]; more details on the results 11 nodes using a variety of random graph and the choice of this decision can be found in models (Erdős-Rényi, Barabasi Albert, Dual Appendix F. of Barabasi-Albert, Watts-Strogatz, Newman- Watts-Strogatz, and random regular graphs) Additionally, for conciseness, in this section and edge weight distributions. These in- we will use “approximation ratio" to mean the stances, which we refer to as *G*, have a varied instance-specific approximation ratio as de- distribution of various graph properties, which scribed in Section 1.2.3. is important when testing heuristics and algo- rithms for solving this problem. *12*For standard QAOA, many optimizers will im- In our simulations, for each instance, we mediately terminate if initialized exactly at the ori- first find five locally approximate solutions gin due to the presence of a saddle point. Instead, to BM-MC2 and keep the best (in terms of each variational parameter (*γ*1*, . . . , γp, β*1*, . . . , βp*) is initialized by sampling uniformly from the interval *11*https://github.com/swati1729/CI-QuBe [*−*0*.*0001*,* 0*.*0001]. 12

|  | 1st Best | QAOA-warmest |  |  |  | Standard QAOA |  |  | GW |  |  | Tie |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 2nd Best | * | Standard | Warm | GW | Warmest | Warm | GW | Warm | Warmest | Standard |  |
| Positive Weighted Graphs | p=1 | 90.3 % | 0.69% | 18.85% | 15.22% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.17% | 9.51% | 0.0% | 55.53% |
|  | p=2 | 98.1% | 0.69% | 20.24% | 25.08% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 1.9% | 0.0% | 52.07% |
|  | p=4 | 100% | 8.65% | 17.64% | 20.58% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 53.11% |
|  | p=8 | 100% | 25.77% | 5.01% | 2.94% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 66.26% |
| All Graphs | p=1 | 90.6% | 0.35% | 17.96% | 17.43% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.53% | 8.84% | 0.0% | 54.86% |
|  | p=2 | 98.1% | 0.44% | 20.17% | 24.86% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.26% | 1.68% | 0.0% | 52.56% |
|  | p=4 | 99.6% | 9.11% | 19.2% | 18.93% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.08% | 0.26% | 0.0% | 52.38% |
|  | p=8 | 99.6% | 27.16% | 7.96% | 3.18% | 0.17% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 0.26% | 0.0% | 0.0% | 61.23% |

Table 2: For each Max-Cut algorithm (Goemans-Williamson, standard QAOA, QAOA-warmest, and QAOA-warm), we report the percentage of instances for which it did the best and second-best (in terms of approximation ratio). Both QAOA-warm and QAOA-warmest use BM-MC2 warm-starts. There is a tie (last column) if the top two algorithms have approximation ratios that differ by no more than 0.01. QAOA-warmest is a part of every tie. Each instance is either accounted for in “Tie" or the other columns. For the column labeled *****, we report, for each circuit depth, the percentage of instances for which QAOA-warmest was within 0.01 approximation ratio of the best algorithm. Figure 2: For both plots, we compare the log-error of QAOA-warmest to both QAOA-warm (right) and standard QAOA (left). BM-MC2 warm-starts are used for both approaches. Each marker in the plot corresponds to a combination of instance (from our graph ensemble *G*) and circuit depth (either *p* = 1 or *p* = 8) with the shape of the marker being used to denote if the instance has only positive edge weights or not. Points below the black line correspond to instances where QAOA-warmest performs better than the other algorithm being compared. 4.2 Comparing QAOA-warmest to Other proximation ratio is less than 0.02. More in- Methods formation regarding these five instances can be found in Appendix F. In Table 2, we show the proportion of graphs where each Max-Cut algorithm (GW and vari- We next report the improvement in ap- ants of QAOA) performs the best for vary- proximation ratios when considering standard ing values of depth *p* = 1*,* 2*,* 4*,* 8. We ob- QAOA, QAOA-warm, and QAOA-warmest serve that for nearly all instances, QAOA- with circuit depths *p* = 1*,* 8. For convenience, warmest beats or performs as well as every for any Max-Cut algorithm, we define the ap- other QAOA variant considered and eventu- proximation error (AE) by AE = 1 *−*AR ally performs at least as well as GW as the where AR is the approximation ratio. Ad- circuit depth increases. We note that at *p* = 8, ditionally, we will refer to log10(AE) as the QAOA-warmest beats GW on all but three in- log-error. Figure 2 gives a comparison of stances but this is easily rectified with a suit- log-errors achieved for various instances. All able vertex-at-top rotation. Also at *p* = 8, points below the *x* = *y* solid line indicate QAOA-warmest outperforms standard QAOA instances where QAOA-warmest beats either on all but two instances but the gap in ap- standard QAOA or QAOA-warm. Note that 13

due to the plots being log-scaled, being below ratio for QAOA-warm, bolstering our claim -2 on each axis corresponds to having an ap- that custom mixers are crucial to the improve- proximation ratio of at least 0.99. For both ment in performance of QAOA. plots, we see that higher approximation ratios In Figure 4, we compare the convergence can be achieved for positive-weighted graphs rates of standard QAOA and QAOA-warmest (cross-marks) and that QAOA-warmest per- with various initilializations: BM-MC*k*, per- forms significantly better for most instances. turbed single-cut initializations (as described When comparing QAOA-warmest and stan- in Section 3.3), and uniform random initial- izations*13* with custom mixers for a random dard QAOA at various circuit depths (red v/s blue), we see that the performance for 10-node instance in our graph library. Con- both standard QAOA and QAOA-warmest sistent with what is seen in the other fig- improves at *p* = 8; however, this phenomenon ures, we see that standard QAOA, QAOA- is not that apparent for QAOA-warm (which warmest, and uniform random initializations is known to plateau in performance with in- quickly achieve high approximation ratios at creased circuit depth for small instances). relatively low circuit depths, with the BM- MC2 initialization doing the best amongst the three across all circuit depths tested. On the other hand, perturbed single-cut initial- izations do not converge as quickly; in par- ticular, when *θ∗*is small (*θ∗∈{*0*.*1*,* 0*.*01*}*) hardly any improvement in the approximation ratio is observed at all. For larger regulariza- tion angles (*θ∗*= 0*.*5), we do see worse per- formance at low depths (*p* = 0*,* 1) as well as a noticeable increase in performance with in- creased circuit depth; however, the amount of this increase is small compared to achieved by QAOA-warmest which begins to outperform the perturbed single-cut initialization (with *θ∗*= 0*.*5) for *p ≥*2. We find similar quali- tative results for most other instances in our Figure 3: Trends in median log-error of standard QAOA graph ensemble *G*. (dotted), QAOA-warm (dashed), and QAOA-warmest (solid) as one varies the number of nodes and circuit Table 3 provides a more aggregated view of depths; the median is taken across graphs in instance li- the convergence of QAOA-warmest with dif- brary *G*. BM-MC2 warm-starts are used for both QAOA- warm and QAOA-warmest. *13*Here, a uniform random initialization refers to a separable state that is randomly created by (inde- Next, we show the trend in approximation pendently) picking a position on the surface of the quality with increase in the number of nodes Bloch sphere uniformly at random for each qubit, and *n* and the depth of the circuit *p*, in Figure then tensorizing the qubits. Although the phase of
1. We see that, across all node sizes, that

each qubit does not effect the expected cut value ob- tained from QAOA-warmest (as discussed in Section circuit depth plays an important role in how 2), it should be noted that the distribution of initial- good an approximation ratio one can expect to izations obtained from sampling from the surface of achieve using QAOA-warmest. It is clear that the Bloch sphere and then removing the phases is dif- QAOA-warmest has superior (median) per- ferent than the distribution of initializations obtained from sampling uniformly from the portion of the great- formance compared to the other algorithms circle formed by the intersection of the Bloch sphere for every combination of circuit depth and surface with the *xz*-plane with positive *x*-coordinate. node-size. We remark that in contrast, an Nonetheless, we have verified (via numerical simula- increased circuit depth resulted in only a tion) that QAOA-warmest performs similarly between the two randomization schemes. marginal improvement in the approximation 14

|  | p = 0 | p = 1 | p = 2 | p = 4 | p = 8 |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| BM-MC2 | 42.3% | 57.8% | 75.0% | 91.9% | 98.1% |
| Standard Initialization \|+⟩⊗n | 0% | 0.6% | 2.4% | 8.7% | 39.4% |
| Single Cut Initialization with θ∗= 0.1 | 0% | 0% | 0% | 0% | 0.7% |

ferent choices of initializations across the en- tire instance library *G*. For each combination of initialization method and circuit depth, the table states the percentage of instances in the library which achieved an instance-specific ap- proximation ratio of 99.0% of higher. The data for the perturbed single-cut initializa- Table 3: The percentage of instances for which QAOA- tions were obtained as follows: for each in- warmest achieves an instance-specific AR of 99.0% for stance, we obtained an optimal solution to each combination of circuit depth and initialization the GW SDP relaxation, we performed 100 method (standard initialization, BM-MC2 initialization, hyperplane roundings on the optimal SDP so- perturbed single-cut initialization with *θ∗*= 0*.*1). lution to obtain 100 cuts, we discarded all cuts whose value is more than 0*.*98*·*Max-Cut(*G*), and we used the best remaining cut to cre- ate a perturbed single-cut initialization with regularization angle *θ∗*= 0*.*1 (as described in Section 3.3); the discarding of cuts with very high values were done in order to ensure that, in the case of a high instance-specific approx- imation ratio, such a ratio can be partly at- tributed to the quantum circuit and not just the initial cut itself. When using the BM-MC2 initializations (with vertex-at-top rotations), there are steady improvements with increased Figure 4: Instance specific approximation ratios circuit depths with 42.3% of the instances achieved by QAOA-warmest with various types of initial- achieving an instance-specific AR of 99.0% at izations: standard initialization (equivalent to standard depth-0; this percentage increases to 98.1% at QAOA), BM-MC2 initialization, perturbed single-cut ini- tialization, and uniform random initializations) for a ran- depth-8. With the standard QAOA initializa- tion, *|*+*⟩⊗*, none of the instances achieve an domly selected 10-node instance. For QAOA-warmest, we used a BM-MC2 initialization with a vertex-at-top ro- instance-specific AR of 99.0% or more; it is tation; here we intentionally chose the worst vertex (i.e. not until depth *p* = 8 that we see a consid- the one with worst AR at depth-0) to better illustrate the erable fraction of the graphs (39.4% respec- convergence rate. For the perturbed single-cut initializa- tion, we chose a cut that obtains an instance-specific tively) achieving such an AR. As for the per- approximation ratio of 0.848 and created initial quantum turbed single-cut initialization with small reg- states using regularization angles of *θ∗*= 0*.*01*,* 0*.*1*,* and ularization angle, we find that nearly none of 0*.*5 radians. For the uniform random initializations, five the instances achieve an instance-specific AR such initializations were created and only the best one was kept (i.e. the one with best AR at depth-0). of 99.0% with the exception of a few instances at depth *p* = 8. to pull calibration data directly from the Guadalupe device and use it to construct a 4.3 QAOA-warm With Noise noise model for use in the simulator. In prin- In addition to the theoretical (noise-less) be- ciple, this combination of actual hardware havior of QAOA-warmest, we also demon- calibration and noise simulation should pre- strate its performance with several example dict the behavior of the device. However, cases using noise models and experiments on the noise models themselves have inherent as- IBM-Q hardware. For both the ideal and sumptions that the noise itself is uncorrelated noisy simulation, we use IBM’s Qiskit soft- and only directly models effects such as sin- ware package [7]. In the case of the noisy sim- gle and two-qubit gate errors, finite qubit life- ulation, we exercise the capability of Qiskit time and dephasing time, and readout noise. 15

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | Warmest Idea Standard Idea Warmest Nois Standard Nois | l l y y |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | GW |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

sen due to the fact that it is a small graph 0.95 that achieves a GW approximation ratio of 0.90 Approximation Ratio 0.912 (see Appendix G) which is close to the lower bound of 0.878 provided by the GW al- 0.85 gorithm. In contrast, both QAOA-warmest and standard QAOA are able to outperform 0.80 this approximation ratio, under ideal, noise- 0.75 less conditions. However, note that QAOA- 0 1 2 3 4 5 p warmest outperforms standard QAOA for all QAOA depths and outperforms GW after Figure 5: Performance of QAOA-warmest (with BM- *p >* 1. We also consider a noise model uti- MC2 warm-starts) and standard QAOA as a function of QAOA depth for an ideal (dashed) and noisy simulation lizing Qiskit’s built in modules [7] and use (dotted). For the chosen 20-node graph, GW acheives calibration data in order to simulate IBM’s an approximation ratio of 0.912, while in the ideal case, Guadalupe device. We note that QAOA- QAOA-warmest outperforms GW for *p ≥*2 while stan- warmest outperforms standard QAOA for all dard QAOA requires *p >* 4. The noise simulation is based on calibration data from IBM-Q’s Guadalupe device. noisy simulations, using the same fixed noise model. In addition to this device-focused noise simulation, we also run QAOA-warmest on a native hardware graph matching IBM’s Guadalupe device. In general, the connectiv- ity of the graph and its matching to physical qubit hardware connectivity plays a key role in performance due to the overhead of insert- ing swap operations in order to compensate for limited connectivity [43]. Therefore, the sim- plest graph is a so-called native graph, which is a graph with exactly the same connectiv- ity as the underlying physical qubit device. This graph is shown in Figure 6. We assign Figure 6: IBMQ Guadalupe device which shows the randomly chosen weights to each edge chosen physical connectivity of qubits. We choose a native graph which matches this connectivity and random weights as from a uniform distribution [*−*10*,* 10]. Finding indicated by color. the Max-Cut solution to this graph can still be done by brute force and for a fixed choice of randomly weighted edges, we find the Max- While these serve as a good starting point to Cut value to be approximately 33.96209. model the noise in a quantum device, as shown We show the results of QAOA-warmest and in the Figure 8, there is significant disagree- standard QAOA in an ideal simulation and on ment between the noise simulation and the actual hardware results. This disagreement hardware in Figure 7. The color scale is shared is mainly attributed to the assumptions men- across all plots, showing that QAOA-warmest is able to find larger cut values as compared tioned earlier, specifically the assumption of to standard QAOA, both in simulation and on uncorrelated noise, where physical hardware experience significant crosstalk. For an exam- actual hardware. For hardware results, we ap- ple demonstration of how typical noise models ply the efficient SPAM noise mitigation strat- egy based on a CTMP strategy [44, 45]. are utilized, see Appendix E. We show in Figure 5 the performance In order to demonstrate the scaling of of QAOA-warmest and standard QAOA on QAOA-warmest, we also show results for an instance generated via a construction by depths *p* = 0*,* 1*,* 2 in ideal simulation, noisy Karloff [42]; this unweighted graph is cho- simulation, and on hardware, as shown in Fig- 16

Simulation Experiment 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.5 9.0 16 7.5 1.0 12 1.0 6.0 Standard 0.5 8 0.5 4.5 4 3.0 0.0 0.0 *β* 0 1.5 0.5 0.5 4 0.0 1.5 1.0 8 1.0 3.0 12 1.5 1.5 1.5 24 1.5 14 20 1.0 1.0 12 16 10 Warmest 0.5 0.5 12 8 0.0 8 0.0 6 *β* 4 4 0.5 0.5 2 0 1.0 1.0 0 4 2 1.5 8 1.5 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 1.5 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 *γ γ* Figure 7: Performance of QAOA-warmest (with BM-MC2 warm-starts) compared to standard QAOA in an ideal simulation and on IBM-Guadalupe hardware. Each subfigure is a scan of *p* = 1 parameters *β* vs *γ*, brighter regions indicating values which result in a larger cut. All figures share the same absolute color scale. 1.0 1.0

|  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |
| St Wa St | andard Ideal rmest Ideal andard Hardware |  |  |
| Wa St Wa | rmest Hardware andard Noisy Simulator rmest Noisy Simulator |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |

0.9 0.9 Approximation Ratio 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0 1 2 0 1 2 p p Figure 8: Performance of QAOA-warmest (with BM-MC2 warm-starts) compared to standard QAOA in an ideal simulation (dashed), noisy simulation (dotted) and on IBM Guadalupe hardware (solid). Each subplot considers a different native hardware graph with randomly selected weights as well as a different choice of initialization procedures. (Left) For a random initialization of the classically informed QAOA-warmest start rotation. (Right) For an efficiently selected, optimal choice for the classically informed QAOA-warmest start rotation. tial state.*14* ure 8. We define *p* = 0 to simply mean In the case of QAOA-warmest, the preparation and measurement of the ini- *14*The warm-starts come from *k* = 2 or *k* = 3 solu- 17

1.00

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | Warmest - Quantinuum Noisy Sim |  |  |
|  |  |  | Warmest - Quantinuum Noisy Sim |  |
|  |  |  | Warmest - Ideal Qiskit Sim Warmest - Quantinuum H1-1 Dev GW | ice |
|  |  | Standard Ideal |  |  |

this directly demonstrates the ability of the QPU to create and measure the classically 0.95 Approximation Ratio suggested cut. 0.90 In addition, Figure 8 shows results for two 0.85 different choices of the state initialization for QAOA-warmest. The left plot shows the re- 0.80 sult of applying a uniform rotation in the 0.75 classical preprocessing stage whereas the right 0 1 2 QAOA Depth shows the result of using the best vertex-at- top rotation amongst the 16 possible vertices, Figure 9: QAOA-warmest performance on Quantinuum i.e., the rotation that gives the largest approx- simulators and hardware. The 20-node Karloff instance imation ratio at *p* = 0. These two plots clearly considered here is directly mapped to the fully-connected Quantinuum 20-ion hardware. In contrast to Figure 5, show the importance of initializing the ini- here we use a GW warmest start and find that this partic- tial quantum state in an optimal way. An- ular initialization outperforms GW on average for *p ≤*2. other important point shown in these plots is that small scale QAOA problems on 16 ware cannot improve on this initial state, the nodes, are nearly exactly solved when a suit- degradation is small considering that each *p* able vertex-at-top rotation is chosen. When layer requires 90 two-qubit ZZ interactions the best vertex-at-top rotation is used, the use (among many other single qubit operations). of QAOA actually shows a decrease in solution We also note the close agreement of the noisy quality on hardware. This is due to the inher- simulator to the actual hardware results. In ent noise on the device and the fact that the order to reduce the cost of these hardware solution quality is nearly optimal in the initial runs, we only consider a single objective func- state. The presence of noisy two-qubit gates tion evaluation (with 1000 shots), using noise- in further layers of the algorithm (32 CNOT less simulations to find the optimal *γi, βi* at gates per layer), overwhelm the small benefit each *p* depth. Even with these considerations, of the algorithm itself for these small prob- we see that the GW Warmest initialization lems. A remaining goal then is to find native outperforms the average GW performance on graphs on hardware for large systems, while hardware up to *p ≤*2. These results indi- also offering sufficiently low error rates, in or- cate that current quantum hardware is very der to demonstrate improved solutions with close to demonstrating improvement over the an optimally chosen initial quantum state and Goemans-Williamson algorithm for Max-Cut increased algorithmic depth (*p >* 0). on known hard instance graphs when using Finally, we show results for QAOA-warmest the QAOA-warmest initialization procedure, run on Quantinuum hardware in Figure 9. and it already outperforms the average per- This 20-ion linear trap allows for arbitrary formance of GW on this particular graph. qubit connectivity and thus has no overhead associated with mapping a specific graph to the hardware. In this case, we again consider

##### 5

##### Discussion

the 20-node Karloff instance graphs used in Figure 5, but here we use the GW warmest Our experimental results suggest that our start initialization. Notably we utilize a uni- QAOA-warmest method combined with ini- form rotation which gives a large initial ap- tializations obtained by classical means can proximation ratio (at *p* = 0) and while hard- outperform both the standard QAOA and the Goemans-Williamson algorithm at relatively tions whereas as the GW algorithm uses *n*-dimensional shallow circuit depths. Conversely, not all solutions. Moreover, the way cuts are determined are initializations on the Bloch sphere are use- different (hyperplane rounding vs quantum measure- ment) so we should expect there to be a difference in ful; in particular random initializations under- approximation ratios. perform compared to classically obtained ini- 18

| Instance ID | QAOA-warmest | QAOA-warm | Standard QAOA | GW |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 778 | 0.9550 | 0.8980 | 0.9635 | 0.9504 |
| 1820 | 0.9483 | 0.9078 | 0.9508 | 0.9429 |

| Instance ID | QAOA-warmest | QAOA-warm | Standard QAOA | GW | QAOA-warmest (modifeid) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1698 | 0.9899 | 0.9950 | 0.9677 | 0.9968 | 0.9998 |
| 1889 | 0.9867 | 0.9886 | 0.9461 | 0.9899 | 0.9995 |
| 2010 | 0.9762 | 0.9797 | 0.9330 | 0.9948 | 0.9992 |

Table 4: These tables reports the approximation ratios achieved for the five instances (amongst those in our instance library *G*) for which depth-8 QAOA-warmest did not obtain the best approximation ratio when compared to depth-8 QAOA-warm, depth-8 standard QAOA, and GW. The top and bottom tables are for instances in which standard QAOA and GW performed the best respectively. The instances in the bottom table have the property that there exists exactly one negative edge weight whose magnitude is much larger than the other edge weights. For the bottom table, in the last column, we also include the approximation ratio for QAOA-warmest in the case where a more suitable vertex-at-top rotation is used; i.e., we take one of the vertices incident to the large-magnitude negative edge and rotate it to the top. success in QAOA-warmest. In the case of classically-inspired initializations (e.g. Burer- Monteiro Max-Cut relaxations or projected GW SDP solutions) which are (classically) in- variant under global rotations, this also in- cludes picking a suitable rotation scheme be- fore embedding the solution into a quantum state. According to a paper by Farhi, Gamarnik, and Gutmann [26], QAOA needs to “see the whole graph" (i.e. have a high enough cir- cuit depth) in order to achieve desireable re- sults. Their results rely on the fact that lo- cal changes in the graph (e.g. modifying an 1 2(1*−*cos *θ k* ) Figure 10: In red, the function that is mini- edge weight) give uncorrelated results in re- *θ/π* mized in the proof of Corollary 3 with *k* = 3. In green, a gards to measured qubits that are sufficiently 1 2(1*−*cos *θ k* ) similar function 2 (1*−*cos(*θ*) that is minimized in the proof 1 far away from such a local change. In other Theorem 2 of [31] (where the BM-MC*k* objective is com- words, standard QAOA cannot distinguish be- pared to the maximum cut instead of the expected cut tween graphs whose local subgraph-structure value from hyperplane rounding) with *k* = 3. Over the is identical. It should be noted that the circuit interval [0*, π*], both achieve a minimum value of 2*/*3 at *θ* = *π*. The corresponding plots for *k* = 2 are similar but used in QAOA-warmest also suffers from such instead both functions reach a minimum value of 3*/*4 at a locality property; however, if we consider *θ* = *π*. the entirety of the QAOA-warmest procedure, including the preprocessing stage of comput- ing warm-starts, then this procedure can pos- tializations. Moreover, adversarial initializa- sibly distinguish between graphs with identi- tions could be chosen if one wanted QAOA to cal local subgraph structure since the initial perform poorly (i.e. by putting qubits near state is sensitive to the global structure of the poles of the Bloch sphere that correspond the graph (when using BM-MC*k* relaxations to the minimum cut). Overall, finding a suit- or projected GW SDP solutions). This sug- able initialization is needed in order to see gests that certain negative theoretical results 19

Ideal Noise

|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | Warmest |  |  |  |  |  |

1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9 Approximation Ratio 0.8 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.6 0.6 0.5 0.5 0 1 2 3 4 5 0 1 2 3 4 5 p Figure 11: Comparison between standard QAOA mixer to using BM-MC2 warm-starts with custom mixers . We show the noiseless (left) and noisy (right) case. In both cases, the custom mixer significantly outperforms the standard mixer. Shaded regions indicate the distribution of results for 20 randomly chosen 8 node graphs with positive and negative weights. apply. The approximation guarantees for our warm-starts at *p* = 0 and convergence to Max-Cut (under adiabatic limit) combined with superior empirical performance provide strong evidence for quantum advantage of this approach at low circuit depths compared to existing classical methods, especially the Goemans-Williamson approximation. An in- teresting open question would be to quan- tify the approximation bounds obtained by QAOA-warmest for finite circuit depth greater than zero. Figure 12: Difference in approximation ratio between *n*-dimensional GW hyperplane rounding and hyper- plane rounding of various warm-start initializations (*k*-

| Number of Servers | Cores Per Server | CPU | RAM | Speed |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 1 | 12 | E5-2630 | 128 GB | 2.30 GHz |
| 1 | 32 | Opteron 6274 | 128 GB | 2.20 GHz |
| 4 | 12 | E5-2630 | 128 GB | 2.30 GHz |
| 2 | 12 | X5660 | 72 GB | 2.80 GHz |
| 2 | 12 | X5660 | 148 GB | 2.80 GHz |
| 4 | 12 | E5645 | 96 GB | 2.40 GHz |

dimensional projected GW SDP solutions (Proj*k*-GW) and approximate BM-MC*k* solutions for *k* = 2*,* 3) as the number of nodes varies. For each instance and each dimension *k*, we obtained 5 random projections and 5 approximate BM-MC*k* solutions, and then kept the best one (of 5) in regards to the BM-MC*k* objective. Each circle in the figure corresponds to an instance from (a subset of) the MQLib library [4]; see Appendix F.3 for details. Table 5: This table details the specifications of the server groups in the high performance computing clus- ter at Georgia Institute of Technology that were used in seen for standard QAOA may not necessar- our numerical experiments. ily hold for QAOA-warmest since the distin- guishability arguments used would no longer 20

Figure 13: For both plots, we compare the log-error of QAOA-warmest (with BM-MC2 warm-starts) to the variant of QAOA proposed by Egger et al. [9] for Max-Cut. For Egger et al.’s approach, we consider two different initializations: initializing the variational parameters to the origin (left) and initializing the parameters in a way that recovers the cut used to initialize the quantum state (right). Each marker in the plot corresponds to a combination of instance (from our graph ensemble *G*) and circuit depth (either *p* = 1 or *p* = 8) with the shape of the marker being used to denote if the instance has only positive edge weights or not. Points below the black line correspond to instances where QAOA-warmest performs better than the other algorithm being compared.

##### 6

##### Methods

each corresponding circuit. The run times for *p* = 0*,* 1*,* 2 are 7182 ns*,* 14968 ns*,* 17379 ns, re- Numerical simulations were performed using spectively. Standard QAOA runs have com- both custom and pre-packaged codes in the parable run times as they differ only by single Tensorflow [46] and Qiskit [7] software pack- qubit gates as compared to QAOA-Warmest. ages. Numerical experiments in Section 4.2 For these hardware runs, we seed the classi- were performed on the high performance com- cal optimization process with ideal parame- ters (*γ∗, β∗*) found in simulation and perform puting cluster at the School of Industrial and Systems Engineering at Georgia Institute of 20 optimization steps each with 8192 shots on Technology. Jobs were sent to various servers hardware. Noisy simulations using hardware- in the cluster as they became available; a list- informed noise models were performed with ing of the servers and their specifications can 200 optimization steps and 3000 shots. These be found in Table 5. simulations were performed on GTRI’s Ice- Classical optimization was performed us- hammer cluster using a node with a Xeon- ing standard optimizers available in python, Gold6242R processor with 80 cores and 376 GB of memory. Secondly, for our results on including ADAM [47], L-BFGS-B [48], and Quantinuum hardware, we only evaluate a sin- COBYLA [49]. For hardware results, we gle point in parameter space (at *γ∗, β∗*) at first describe the usage of IBM’s Guadalupe each *p* depth with 1000 shots. This choice device along with Qiskit software and the was motivated in order to reduce the cost of COBYLA optimizer. The Guadalupe device hardware runs and do not represent any de- is a 16 qubit superconducting hardware with a heavy hexagonal connectivity. This de- vice or fundamental limitation. The Quantin- vice typically has average single qubit gate uum H1-1 20 qubit device reports average sin- errors of 3*.*7204 *×* 10*−*4, two-qubit gate er- gle qubit gate errors of 5 *×* 10*−*5, two qubit gate errors of 3 *×* 10*−*3 and SPAM errors of rors of 1*.*075 *×* 10*−*2 and measurement error 3 *×* 10*−*3. Noisy simulation of the Quantin- of 1*.*776 *×* 10*−*2, representing a quantum de- vice of comparable quality to the state of the uum device were also performed through the cloud, provided by the Quantinuum service. art. For the QAOA-Warmest runs shown in Fig 8, the run time on hardware can be esti- mated by the **schedule** method of Qiskit for 21

##### 7

##### Data Availability

of IBM Quantum services for this work. The views expressed are those of the authors and The graph instances used in the numeri- do not reflect the official policy or position of cal simulation are accessible at the follow- IBM or the IBM Quantum team. The authors ing github repository: https://github.com/ would also like to thank Hassan Mortagy for swati1729/CI-QuBe. Additional experimen- his careful comments and feedback on an ini- tal data is available via request from the cor- tial version of this work. responding author.

##### References

##### 8

##### Author Contributions

[1] John Preskill. “Quantum computing in Reuben Tate developed the theory for cus- the NISQ era and beyond”. Quantum **2**, tom mixers, with guidance and helpful discus- 79 (2018). sions with the team including Jai Moondra, [2] Aram W. Harrow and Ashley Montanaro. Bryan Gard, Greg Mohler and Swati Gupta. “Quantum computational supremacy”. Swati Gupta introduced the idea of iterative Nature **549**, 203–209 (2017). rounding of Goemans-Williamson SDP solu- [3] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and tion to lower dimensions. Jai Moondra devel- Sam Gutmann. “A quantum approximate oped theoretical guarantees for projected GW optimization algorithm” (2014). warm-starts with guidance from the team. All [4] Iain Dunning, Swati Gupta, and John Sil- authors contributed to the design of the nu- berholz. “What works best when? A sys- merical simulations, and these were imple- tematic evaluation of heuristics for Max- mented by Reuben Tate. Bryan Gard de- Cut and QUBO”. INFORMS Journal on signed and implemented the experiments on Computing**30** (2018). both IBM-Q and Quantinuum hardware. All [5] Michel X Goemans and David P authors contributed to the editing and writing Williamson. “Improved approximation al- of the manuscript to enable the best presen- gorithms for maximum cut and satisfi- tation of results. ability problems using semidefinite pro- gramming”. Journal of the ACM (JACM) **42**, 1115–1145 (1995).

##### 9

##### Competing Interests

[6] Samuel Burer and Renato DC Monteiro. “A nonlinear programming algorithm for The authors declare that there are no compet- solving semidefinite programs via low- ing financial or non-financial interests. rank factorization”. Mathematical Pro- gramming **95**, 329–357 (2003).

##### Acknowledgement

[7] Héctor Abraham, AduOffei, Rochisha Agarwal, Ismail Yunus Akhalwaya, Gadi A part of this work was done when authors Aleksandrowicz, et al. “Qiskit: An open- R. Tate and S. Gupta were at the Georgia In- source framework for quantum comput- ing” (2019). stitute of Technology. This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Ad- [8] Madelyn Cain, Edward Farhi, Sam Gut- vanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) mann, Daniel Ranard, and Eugene Tang. under Contract No. HR001120C0046. This “The QAOA gets stuck starting from a research used resources of the Oak Ridge good classical string” (2022). [9] Daniel J. Egger, Jakub Mareček, and Ste- Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory, which is sup- fan Woerner. “Warm-starting quantum ported by the Office of Science of the U.S. De- optimization”. Quantum **5**, 479 (2021). partment of Energy under Contract No. DE- [10] Stefan H Sack, Raimel A Medina, AC05-00OR22725. We acknowledge the use Richard Kueng, and Maksym Serbyn. 22

“Recursive greedy initialization of the tion in near-term quantum optimiza- quantum approximate optimization al- tion”. Quantum Science and Technology gorithm with guaranteed improvement”. **5**, 044009 (2020). Physical Review A **107**, 062404 (2023). [19] Colin Campbell and Edward Dahl. [11] Stefan H Sack and Maksym Serbyn. “QAOA of the highest order”. In “Quantum annealing initialization of the 2022 IEEE 19th International Conference quantum approximate optimization algo- on Software Architecture Companion rithm”. quantum **5**, 491 (2021). (ICSA-C). Pages 141–146. IEEE (2022). [12] Leo Zhou, Sheng-Tao Wang, Soonwon [20] Rebekah Herrman, Lorna Treffert, James Choi, Hannes Pichler, and Mikhail D Ostrowski, Phillip C Lotshaw, Travis S Lukin. “Quantum approximate opti- Humble, and George Siopsis. “Impact of mization algorithm: Performance, mech- graph structures for QAOA on maxcut”. anism, and implementation on near- Quantum Information Processing **20**, 1– term devices”. Physical Review X **10**, 21 (2021). 021067 (2020). [21] Gopal Chandra Santra, Fred Jendrzejew- [13] Ruslan Shaydulin, Phillip C Lotshaw, ski, Philipp Hauke, and Daniel J Eg- Jeffrey Larson, James Ostrowski, and ger. “Squeezing and quantum approxi- mate optimization” (2022). Travis S Humble. “Parameter transfer for quantum approximate optimization of [22] Ruslan Shaydulin, Stuart Hadfield, Tad weighted maxcut”. ACM Transactions on Hogg, and Ilya Safro. “Classical symme- Quantum Computing **4**, 1–15 (2023). tries and the quantum approximate opti- [14] Alexey Galda, Xiaoyuan Liu, Danylo mization algorithm”. Quantum Informa- tion Processing **20**, 1–28 (2021). Lykov, Yuri Alexeev, and Ilya Safro. “Transferability of optimal QAOA pa- [23] Jonathan Wurtz and Peter Love. “Max- rameters between random graphs”. In cut quantum approximate optimization 2021 IEEE International Conference on algorithm performance guarantees for Quantum Computing and Engineering p> 1”. Physical Review A **103**, (QCE). Pages 171–180. IEEE (2021). 042612 (2021). [15] Johannes Weidenfeller, Lucia C Valor, [24] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Julien Gacon, Caroline Tornow, Luciano Sam Gutmann. “Quantum algorithms for Bello, Stefan Woerner, and Daniel J Eg- fixed qubit architectures” (2017). ger. “Scaling of the quantum approximate [25] Sergey Bravyi, Alexander Kliesch, optimization algorithm on superconduct- Robert Koenig, and Eugene Tang. ing qubit based hardware”. Quantum **6**, “Obstacles to variational quantum 870 (2022). optimization from symmetry protec- [16] Phillip C Lotshaw, Thien Nguyen, An- tion”. Physical Review Letters **125**, 260505 (2020). thony Santana, Alexander McCaskey, Rebekah Herrman, James Ostrowski, [26] Edward Farhi, David Gamarnik, and George Siopsis, and Travis S Humble. Sam Gutmann. “The quantum approxi- “Scaling quantum approximate optimiza- mate optimization algorithm needs to see tion on near-term hardware”. Scientific the whole graph: A typical case” (2020). Reports **12**, 12388 (2022). [27] Sergey Bravyi, Alexander Kliesch, [17] Gian Giacomo Guerreschi and Anne Y Robert Koenig, and Eugene Tang. “Hy- Matsuura. “QAOA for max-cut requires brid quantum-classical algorithms for hundreds of qubits for quantum speed- approximate graph coloring”. Quantum up”. Scientific reports **9**, 1–7 (2019). **6**, 678 (2022). [18] Charles Moussa, Henri Calandra, and [28] Matthew B Hastings. “Classical and Vedran Dunjko. “To quantum or not quantum bounded depth approximation to quantum: towards algorithm selec- algorithms” (2019). 23

[29] Kunal Marwaha. “Local classical max-cut ACM symposium on Theory of comput- algorithm outperforms *p* = 2 QAOA on ing. Pages 212–219. (1996). high-girth regular graphs”. Quantum **5**, [38] Yin Zhang, Samuel Burer, and Renato 437 (2021). D. C. Monteiro. “Rank-2 relaxation [30] Boaz Barak and Kunal Marwaha. “Clas- heuristics for max-cut and other binary sical algorithms and quantum limita- quadratic programs”. SIAM Journal on tions for maximum cut on high-girth Optimization **12**, 503—-521 (2001). graphs” (2021). [39] Song Mei, Theodor Misiakiewicz, An- [31] Reuben Tate, Majid Farhadi, Creston drea Montanari, and Roberto Imbuzeiro Herold, Greg Mohler, and Swati Gupta. Oliveira. “Solving sdps for synchro- “Bridging classical and quantum with nization and maxcut problems via the SDP initialized warm-starts for QAOA”. grothendieck inequality”. In Conference ACM Transactions on Quantum Com- on learning theory. Pages 1476–1515. puting (2022). PMLR (2017). [32] Stuart Hadfield, Zhihui Wang, Bryan [40] Ojas Parekh and Kevin Thompson. “An O’Gorman, Eleanor G. Rieffel, Davide optimal product-state approximation for Venturelli, and Rupak Biswas. “From the 2-local quantum hamiltonians with posi- tive terms” (2022). arXiv:2206.08342. quantum approximate optimization algo- rithm to a quantum alternating operator [41] Reuben Tate and Swati Gupta. “Ci- ansatz”. Algorithms**12** (2019). qube”. GitHub repository (2021). [33] Zhihui Wang, Nicholas C. Rubin, Ja- url: https://github.com/swati1729/ son M. Dominy, and Eleanor G. Rief- CI-QuBe. fel. “*xy* mixers: Analytical and numer- [42] Howard Karloff. “How good is the ical results for the quantum alternating Goemans–Williamson MAX-CUT algo- operator ansatz”. Phys. Rev. A **101**, rithm?”. SIAM Journal on Computing 012320 (2020). **29**, 336–350 (1999). [34] Linghua Zhu, Ho Lun Tang, George S. [43] Matthew P Harrigan, Kevin J Sung, Barron, F. A. Calderon-Vargas, Matthew Neeley, Kevin J Satzinger, Nicholas J. Mayhall, Edwin Barnes, Frank Arute, Kunal Arya, Juan Atalaya, and Sophia E. Economou. “Adaptive Joseph C Bardin, Rami Barends, Sergio quantum approximate optimization algo- Boixo, et al. “Quantum approximate op- rithm for solving combinatorial problems timization of non-planar graph problems on a quantum computer”. Phys. Rev. on a planar superconducting processor”. Research **4**, 033029 (2022). Nature Physics **17**, 332–336 (2021). [35] Andreas Bärtschi and Stephan Eiden- [44] Sergey Bravyi, Sarah Sheldon, Abhinav benz. “Grover mixers for QAOA: Shift- Kandala, David C. Mckay, and Jay M. ing complexity from mixer design to state Gambetta. “Mitigating measurement er- preparation”. In 2020 IEEE Interna- rors in multiqubit experiments”. Phys. tional Conference on Quantum Comput- Rev. A **103**, 042605 (2021). ing and Engineering (QCE). Pages 72–82. [45] George S. Barron and Christopher J. IEEE (2020). Wood. “Measurement error mitigation for [36] Zhang Jiang, Eleanor G Rieffel, and Zhi- variational quantum algorithms” (2020). hui Wang. “Near-optimal quantum circuit [46] Martín Abadi, Ashish Agarwal, Paul for grover’s unstructured search using a Barham, Eugene Brevdo, Zhifeng Chen, transverse field”. Physical Review A **95**, Craig Citro, Greg S. Corrado, Andy 062317 (2017). Davis, Jeffrey Dean, Matthieu Devin, [37] Lov K Grover. “A fast quantum mechan- Sanjay Ghemawat, Ian Goodfellow, An- ical algorithm for database search”. In drew Harp, Geoffrey Irving, Michael Proceedings of the twenty-eighth annual Isard, Yangqing Jia, Rafal Jozefow- 24

icz, Lukasz Kaiser, Manjunath Kudlur, tum computation and quantum informa- Josh Levenberg, Dandelion Mané, Ra- tion: 10th anniversary edition”. Cam- jat Monga, Sherry Moore, Derek Mur- bridge University Press, New York. ray, Chris Olah, Mike Schuster, Jonathon (2011). Shlens, Benoit Steiner, Ilya Sutskever, [57] Vincent R. Pascuzzi, Andre He, Chris- Kunal Talwar, Paul Tucker, Vincent Van- tian W. Bauer, Wibe A. de Jong, and houcke, Vijay Vasudevan, Fernanda Vié- Benjamin Nachman. “Computation- gas, Oriol Vinyals, Pete Warden, Mar- ally efficient zero-noise extrapolation for tin Wattenberg, Martin Wicke, Yuan quantum-gate-error mitigation”. Physical Yu, and Xiaoqiang Zheng. “TensorFlow: Review A **105**, 042406 (2022). Large-scale machine learning on hetero- [58] Ewout Van Den Berg, Zlatko K Minev, geneous systems” (2015). Abhinav Kandala, and Kristan Temme. [47] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. “Probabilistic error cancellation with “Adam: A method for stochastic opti- sparse pauli–lindblad models on noisy mization” (2014). quantum processors”. Nature Physic- [48] Roger Fletcher. “Practical methods of sPages 1–6 (2023). optimization (2nd edition)”. John Wiley [59] Nathan Krislock, Jérôme Malick, and and Sons. New York, NY, USA (1987). Frédéric Roupin. “BiqCrunch: A [49] M.J.D. Powell. “A direct search optimiza- semidefinite branch-and-bound method tion method that models the objective for solving binary quadratic problems”. and constraint functions by linear inter- ACM Transactions on Mathematical polation”. Advances in Optimization and Software**43** (2017). Numerical Analysis **275**, 51–67 (1994). [60] Andries E. Brouwer, Sebastian M. [50] Alan J. Laub. “Matrix analysis for scien- Cioabă, Ferdinand Ihringer, and Matt tists and engineers”. Volume 91. Siam. McGinnis. “The smallest eigenvalues of (2005). hamming graphs, johnson graphs and [51] Georg Frobenius. “Ueber matrizen aus other distance-regular graphs with clas- nicht negativen elementen”. Sitzungs- sical parameters”. Journal of Combinato- berichte der Königlich Preussischen rial Theory, Series B **133**, 88–121 (2018). Akademie der WissenschaftenPages [61] Donald Knuth. “Combinatorial matrices”. 456–477 (1912). Selected Papers on Discrete Mathemat- [52] A. Kaveh and H. Rahami. “A unified ics (2000). method for eigendecomposition of graph products”. Communications in Numerical Methods in Engineering with Biomedical

##### A

##### Proofs

Applications **21**, 377–388 (2005). [53] Simon Špacapan. “Connectivity of carte- 2 sian products of graphs”. Applied Math- **Proof of Proposition** ematics Letters **21**, 682–685 (2008). *Proof.* Let *|s*0*⟩*= N*n* [54] Jacek Gondzio and Andreas Grothey. *j*=1 *|s*0*,j⟩*with *|s*0*,j⟩*= cos(*θj/*2) *|*0*⟩*+*eiϕj* sin(*θj/*2) *|*1*⟩*be an arbitrary “Solving nonlinear financial planning problems with 109 decision variables on separable initial state. As a consequence of massively parallel architectures”. WIT Proposition 1, it suffices to show that QAOA- Transactions on Modelling and Simula- warmest with this initial state *|s*0*⟩*yields the tion**43** (2006). same expected cut value (at the same varia- [55] Fan RK Chung. “Spectral graph theory”. tional parameters) as another separable initial state *|s*0*⟩′* where each qubit of *|s*0*⟩′* lies in the Volume 92. American Mathematical Soc. (1997). *xz*-plane of the Bloch sphere with positive *x*- [56] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang. “Quan- coordinate. 25

We consider the state *|s*0*⟩′* = N*n j*=1 *|s*0*,j⟩′* relation between *UB,k* and ‘ *UB,k*: where *|s*0*,j⟩′* = cos(*θj/*2) *|*0*⟩*+ sin(*θj/*2) *|*1*⟩*. Geometrically, going from *|s*0*⟩*to *|s*0*⟩′* has the *Rz,k*(*−ϕk*)*UB,kRz,k*(*ϕk*) effect of dropping the phase for all qubits so =*Ry,k*(*θj*)*Rz,k*(2*βℓ*)*Ry,k*(*−θj*) = ‘ *UB,k.* (7) that they lie in the *xz*-plane of the Bloch sphere with positive *x*-coordinate (assuming For convenience, we will let that none of the qubits are at the poles). It suffices to show that we can drop the *p* h i Y phase for single qubit of *|s*0*⟩*(say qubit *k*) *U*(*γ, β*) = *UB*(*βℓ*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *,* without changing the expected cut value; *ℓ*=1 the argument can then be easily repeated and for the remaining qubits to show that *|s*0*⟩* and *|s*0*⟩′* yield identical expected cut val- *p* h i Y ues. In this case, we consider the initial *U*(*γ, β*) = *UB*(*βℓ*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *,* “ ” *s*0*⟩*= N*n s*0*,k⟩*= *|s*0*,k⟩′* state *|*“ *j*=1 *|*d *s*0*,j⟩*where *|*d *ℓ*=1 and *|*d *s*0*,j⟩*= *|s*0*,j⟩*for *j̸* = *k* (i.e. only the position of qubit *k* is modified). Letting i.e., *UB* and ” *UB* correspond to the QAOA- *Rx,k*(*θ*)*, Ry,k*(*θ*)*, Rz,k*(*θ*) represent the stan- warmest circuit (excluding the initial state) dard rotation operator of the *k*th qubit (about for *|s*0*⟩*and *|*“ *s*0*⟩*respectively. axes *x, y, z* respectively) about the Bloch The claim amounts to showing (up to some sphere by angle *θ*, we can also write global phase) the following: *⟨s*0*| U*(*γ, β*)*†HCU*(*γ, β*) *|s*0*⟩ |*“ *s*0*⟩*= *Rz,k*(*−ϕk*) *|s*0*⟩,* (6) *U*(*γ, β*)*†HC*“ = *⟨*“ *s*0*|* “ *U*(*γ, β*) *|*“ *s*0*⟩,* i.e., *|*“ *s*0*⟩*can be obtained from *|s*0*⟩*by rotating around the *z*-axis (of the Bloch sphere) by the for any circuit depth *p* and any vari- appropriate amount. ational parameters *γ* = (*γ*1*, . . . , γp*) and Let *HB* and d *HB* be the corresponding cus- *β* = (*β*1*, . . . , βp*); and in particular, QAOA- tom mixers for *|s*0*⟩*and *|*“ *s*0*⟩*respectively. warmest gives the same expected cut value Let *UB*(*βℓ*) = exp(*−iβℓHB*) and ” *UB*(*βℓ*) = for both *|s*0*⟩*and *|*“ *s*0*⟩*. exp(*−iβℓ*d *HB*). For convenience, let *UC*(*γℓ*) = First we observe that, exp(*−iγℓHC*). We can write *UB*(*βℓ*) = *UB,̸*=*k*(*βℓ*)*UB,k*(*βℓ*) where *UB,k*(*βℓ*) is the por- *U*(*γ, β*) *|s*0*⟩* tion of *UB*(*βℓ*) that acts on qubit *k* and *p* h i Y *UB,̸*=*k*(*βℓ*) is the portion that acts on the = *UB*(*βℓ*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *|s*0*⟩* remaining qubits; we can similarly write *ℓ*=1 *p UB*(*βℓ*) = *UB,̸*=*k*(*βℓ*) ‘ *UB,k*(*βℓ*) (the part of the h i ” Y = *UB,̸*=*k*(*βℓ*)*UB,k*(*βℓ*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *|s*0*⟩* mixer that does not affect the *k*th qubit re- *ℓ*=1 mains the same). Geometrically, the opera- *p* h tion *UB,k*(*βℓ*) corresponds to rotating qubit Y = *UB,̸*=*k*(*βℓ*)*Rz,k*(*ϕk*) *k* around its original position on the Bloch *ℓ*=1 sphere by angle 2*βℓ*so, *Rz,k*(*−ϕk*)*UB,k*(*βℓ*)*Rz,k*(*ϕk*) i *Rz,k*(*−ϕk*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *|s*0*⟩* h *UB,k* = *Rz,k*(*ϕk*)*Ry,k*(*θj*)*Rz,k*(2*βℓ*) *p* h Y = *UB,̸*=*k*(*βℓ*)*Rz,k*(*ϕk*) ‘ *UB,k*(*βℓ*) i *Ry,k*(*−θj*)*Rz,k*(*−ϕj*) *. ℓ*=1 i *Rz,k*(*−ϕk*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *|s*0*⟩* (by Equation 7) The equation above yields the following key 26

*That is, unit-scale projection of u on v is equivalent to first unit-scale projecting u to A p* h Y *and projecting this projection* Λ*A*(*u*) *on v.* = *Rz,k*(*ϕk*)*UB,̸*=*k*(*βℓ*) ‘ *UB,k*(*βℓ*) *ℓ*=1 *Proof.* Let *{v*1*, . . . , vk}* be an orthonormal ba- i *UC*(*γℓ*)*Rz,k*(*−ϕk*) *|s*0*⟩* (commutativity) sis for *A*. Let *αi* = *u⊤vi*. Then *p* P *i∈*[*k*] *αivi* h i Y = *Rz,k*(*ϕk*)” *UB*(*βℓ*)*UC*(*γℓ*)*Rz,k*(*−ϕk*) *|s*0*⟩* Π*A*(*u*) = X *αivi,* Λ*A*(*u*) = »P *i∈*[*k*] *α*2 *ℓ*=1 *i∈*[*k*] *i* (combine ‘ *UB,k* and *UB,̸*=*k*) Since *v ∈A*, write *v* = P *i∈*[*k*] *βivi*. Then we *p* h i have =*Rz,k*(*ϕk*) Y *UB*(*βℓ*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *Rz,k*(*−ϕk*) *|s*0*⟩* ” *ℓ*=1 (Λ*A*(*u*)) = P *i∈*[*k*] *αiβi* (telescoping) Π*v v,* »P *i∈*[*k*] *α*2 *p i* h i Y =*Rz,k*(*ϕk*) *UB*(*βℓ*)*UC*(*γℓ*) *|*“ *s*0*⟩* ” so that *ℓ*=1 (by Equation 6) (Λ*A*(*u*)) = Π*v* (Λ*A*(*u*)) Λ*v* =*Rz,k*(*ϕk*)“ *U*(*γ, β*) *|*“ *s*0*⟩. ∥*Π*v* (Λ*A*(*u*))*∥*2 P *i∈*[*k*] *αiβi* We now finally show that QAOA-warmest = *v* ||| ||| P *i∈*[*k*] *αiβi* initialized with *|s*0*⟩*and *|*“ *s*0*⟩*yield the same value; in particular the extraneous *Rz*(*ϕk*) Π*v*(*u*) = *v* term from the previous calculations will not *∥*Π*v*(*u*)*∥*2 effect the measurement due to commutativity = Λ*v*(*u*)*.* with the cost Hamiltonian: *⟨s*0*| U*(*γ, β*)*†HCU*(*γ, β*) *|s*0*⟩* Note that the above lemma is deterministic statement; we have not used any randomness *U*(*γ, β*)*†Rz*(*ϕk*)*†HCRz*(*ϕk*)“ = *⟨*“ *s*0*|* “ *U*(*γ, β*) *|*“ *s*0*⟩* so far. *U*(*γ, β*)*†HC*“ = *⟨*“ *s*0*|* “ *U*(*γ, β*) *|*“ *s*0*⟩,* Let us consider what happens if we select a linear subspace *A* of R*n* of dimension *k* uni- formly randomly from R*n* (one way to ensure where the last equality follows since *HC* it is chosen uniformly randomly is to select commutes with *Rz*(*ϕk*). This completes the unit vectors *vi ∈Rn, i ∈*[*k*] recursively so that proof. *vi* is chosen uniformly randomly in the space orthogonal to *v*1*, . . . , vi−*1). Once we have *A*, let us select a vector *v ∈A* uniformly ran- domly again. Is this equivalent to choosing a **Proof of Theorem 2.** Given a subspace *A* vector *v ∈*R*n* uniformly randomly? By sym- of R*n*, if *A* = span(*v*) for some unit vector *v ∈* R, we abuse the notation and denote Π*v*(*u*) = metry, it is, since the former experiment is not biased in favor of any direction. We omit the Πspan(*v*)(*u*) and Λ*v*(*u*) = Λspan(*v*)(*u*). We need formal proof and state it as a lemma here: two lemmas before we prove the theorem. **Lemma 5.** *Let u, v be unit vectors in* R*n and *Lemma 6.** *Let E denote the experiment of let A denote a linear subspace of* R*n of di- choosing a unit vector v chosen uniformly ran- domly from* R*n. Let E′ denote the experiment mension k such that v ∈A. If* Π*A*(*u*)*̸* = 0 *and of choosing a linear subspace A of dimension k* Π*v*(*u*)*̸* = 0*, then uniformly randomly from* R*n, and then choos- ing a unit vector v′ uniformly randomly from* (Λ*A*(*u*))*.* Λ*v*(*u*) = Λ*v* 27

*A. Then E′* = *E, i.e., they correspond to the* shows that E*Y ≥αC*. We first show that Pr (*Y >* (1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* ) *≥αϵ* using Markov in- *same probability space.* equality: We are ready for the proof of Theorem 2. Pr (*Y >* (1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* ) *Proof.* Let *Un* = *{v ∈*R*n* : *∥v∥*2 = 1*}* be the = 1 *−*Pr (*Y ≤*(1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* ) set of unit vectors in R*n*. Recall that for a = 1 *−*Pr (*C −Y ≥C −*(1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* ) given probability space, a random variable is a real-valued function on the sample space, E (*C −Y* ) *≥*1 *−* or that *X, Y* : *Un →*R. From Lemma 6, *C −*(1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* the two experiments correspond to the same *ϵ*E*Y* = probability space. Therefore, it is enough to *C −*(1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* show that *X*(*v*) = *Y* (*v*) for all *v ∈Un*. *ϵ*E*Y* One key observation is that rounding on a *≥* E*Y α −*(1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* random hyperplane is equivalent to unit-scale *αϵ* projecting to a uniformly random vector *v*: = 1 *−α*(1 *−ϵ*) indeed, let *v* be the vector normal to the uni- *≥αϵ.* form hyperplane, then any unit vector *u* is rounded to 1 if *u·v >* 0 and to *−*1 if *u·v <* 0. log *n |u·v|* = Λ*v*(*u*)*⊤v*. *u·v* Suppose that independent cuts are That is, *u* is rounded to *ϵ* produced by applying the two-step rounding Therefore, procedure log *n* times. Then the probabil- h i X Λ*v*(*ui*)*⊤v ·* Λ*v*(*uj*)*⊤v <* 0 ity that all of these cuts have value less than *X*(*v*) = *wij* **1* .* (1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* is at most *ij∈E*(*G*) = 1 Similarly, for a given *A* such that *v ∈A*, we log *n ≤*(*e−αϵ*) log *n* (1 *−αϵ*) *ϵ nα , ϵ* have *Y* (*v*) is equal to: where we have used the standard inequality h (Λ*A*(*ui*))*⊤v* X *wij***1** Λ*v* exp(*−x*) *≥*1 *−x*. Since *α ∈*(0*,* 1), this prob- *ij∈E*(*G*) ability goes to 0 as *n* goes to *∞*. (Λ*A*(*uj*))*⊤v <* 0 i *·* Λ*v .* We prove the second claim of part 2. Given a *k*-dimensional subspace *A* of R*n*, let *wA* Since dim(*A*) = *k* is a constant and *A* is denote the average cut value after Goemans- chosen uniformly randomly, Π*A*(*ui*)*̸* = 0 for Williamson hyperplane rounding is performed each *i* with probability 1. From Lemma 5, we on *A*, i.e. (Λ*A*(*u*)) = Λ*v*(*u*) for all unit vectors have Λ*v* R *v∈UA*(cut value along *v*) *dv u* and for all *A*. *wA* = *,* R *v∈UA dv* Therefore, we have, where *UA* is the set of all unit vectors in *A*. *Y* (*v*) Notice that h i X Λ*v*(*ui*)*⊤v ·* Λ*v*(*uj*)*⊤v <* 0 = *wij* **1** R *A wA dA ij∈E*(*G*) E*Y* = *A dA .* R = *X*(*v*)*.* For the first step of the two-step rounding Since *X* and *Y* have the same distribution, procedure (i.e., the step selecting a random the same approximation guarantee holds for subspace of dimension *k*), let *Z* denote the *X, Y* . This proves part 1 of the theorem. random variable that takes value *wA* when We prove part 2 next. Let *C* denote the subspace *A* is selected. We need to show that maximum cut value on graph *G*, and denote for log *n* i.i.d. random variables *Z*1*, . . . , Z* log *n ϵ* , *α* = 0*.*878 for convenience. Then, part 1 *ϵ* 28

there is at least some *Zi* such that *Zi ≥* these substitutions, we have (1 *−ϵ*)E*Y* . Since the random subspace is se- *F ′* lected uniformly randomly, we have that 0 Max-Cut(*G*) E[**1**[*i* and *j* have different spins]] R *A wA dA* E*Z* = = E*Y. ≥κ* min 1 *π* arccos(*xi · xj*) R *A dA* (*i,j*)*∈E fk*(*θij*) = *κ* min A similar Markov inequality analysis on *Z θij/π* (*i,j*)*∈E* then gives the result. *fk*(*θ*) *≥κ* min *θ/π θ∈*[0*,π*] 1 (1 *−*cos *θ* ) 2 *k* = *κ* min *. θ/π θ∈*[0*,π*] For *k ∈{*2*,* 3*}*, it is straightforward to verify that the minimum in the last line above is **Proof of Corollary 3** achieved at *θ* = *π* (see Figure 10) which leads *F ′* Max-Cut(*G*) being at least 3 to the ratio 4*κ* and 0 *Proof.* Let *F ′* 0 = *F ′* 0(*γ, β*) be the expected 2 3*κ* respectively for *k* = 2*,* 3. value of Max-Cut obtained by quantum sam- pling (i.e., QAOA for *p* = 0). Then, **Proof of Observation** 4 *F ′ Proof.* We prove something more general 0 Max-Cut(*G*) than what is stated in Proposition 4. In- *F ′* stead of considering a *particular* cut where 0 *≥κ ·* HP(*x*) hyperplane-rounding yields an approximation (since HP(*x*) *≥κ*Max-Cut(*G*)) ratio of *α*, we will instead consider a *ran- wij*E[**1**[*i* & *j* have different spins]] *dom* cut (obtained via hyperplane rounding *≥κ* min *wij* where the hyperplane is selected uniformly *π* arccos(*xi · xj*) (*i,j*)*∈E* at random). We will show that in expecta- (*a*+*c b*+*d ≥*min(*a b, c d*) for *a, b, c, d ≥*0) tion (considering both the randomness of the E[**1**[*i* & *j* have different spins]] hyperplane rounding and the randomness of = *κ* min *.* 1 *π* arccos(*xi · xj*) (*i,j*)*∈E* the quantum sampling), that the expected cut value is at least 0*.*878 cos2*|V |*(*θ∗/*2). Let *X* denote the random variable corre- sponding to the cut value obtained from the For *i, j ∈* [*n*], let *θij* denote the an- cut obtained by quantum measurement of a gle between *xi* and *xj*. We can write perturbed single-cut initialization obtained by E[**1**[*i* and *j* have different spins]] = *fk*(*θij*), GW hyperplane rounding as described in Sec- that is, this expectation is solely a function of tion 3.3. For any *S ⊆V* , let GW(*S*) denote the angle between the adjacent vertices and the event that the cut (*S, V \S*) was obtained the dimension *k* considered. In particular, in from the GW hyperplane rounding step. Sim- Theorem 2 of Tate et al. [31], they show for ilarly, let QM(*S*) denote the event that quan- *k ∈{*2*,* 3*}* that tum measurement of the initial state resulted in the cut (*S, V \ S*). *fk*(*θij*) = 1 Å 1 *−*cos *θij* ã First, observe that if the cut (*S, V \ S*) is *.* 2 *k* used to initialize the quantum state with reg- ularization angle *θ∗*, then the probability of Additionally, arccos(*xi · xj*) = *θij*. Using quantum measurement getting the same cut 29

is cos2*|V |*(*θ∗/*2); this is because each vertex in- where for *j* = 1*, . . . , n*, dependently has probability cos2(*θ∗/*2) of re- *|s*0*,j⟩*= cos(*θj/*2) *|*0*⟩*+ *eiϕj* sin(*θj/*2) *|*1*⟩.* maining on the same side of the cut used to initialize the quantum state. Using this fact, Here, *θj* and *ϕj* can be interpreted as the po- we find that, lar and azimuthal angle respectively of the *j*th qubit on the Bloch sphere. The posi- tion of the *j*th qubit on the Bloch sphere E[*X*] can also be described in Cartesian coordinates X E[*X |* GW(*S*)] Pr(GW(*S*)) = ˆ*nj* = (*xj, yj, zj*) via the following transforma- *S⊆V* tion from spherical to Cartesian coordinates: X X E[*X |* GW(*S*)*,* QM(*T*)] = *xj* = sin *θj* cos *ϕj, S⊆V T⊆V yj* = sin *θj* sin *ϕj,* ! *zj* = cos *θj. ·* Pr(QM(*T*) *|* GW(*S*)) *·* Pr(GW(*S*)) Recall (from Section 2) the custom mixing X E[*X |* GW(*S*)*,* QM(*S*)] Hamiltonian *HB* is then constructed as fol- *≥* lows: *S⊆V n* ! M *HB* = *HB,j, ·* Pr(QM(*S*) *|* GW(*S*)) *·* Pr(GW(*S*)) *j*=1 where *HB,j* = *xjσx* + *yjσy* + *zjσz*. To de- ! X cut(*S*) *·* cos2*|V |*(*θ∗/*2) *·* Pr(GW(*S*)) velop a geometrical understanding of the cus- = tom mixer, consider the operator *R*ˆ*n,j*(*α*) that *S⊆V* rotates the *j*th qubit by angle *α* about the ˆ*n*- ! = cos2*|V |*(*θ∗/*2) X cut(*S*) Pr(GW(*S*)) axis for some unit vector ˆ*n* = (*x, y, z*); such as *S⊆V* operation can be written as: *≥*cos2*|V |*(*θ∗/*2) *·* 0*.*878Max-Cut(*G*)*, R*ˆ*n,j*(*α*) = exp(*−iα* 2 (*xσx j* + *yσy j* + *zσz j* ))*.* Recall that for the *k*th of the *p* stages of the E[*X*] and thus Max-Cut(*G*) *≥*0*.*878 cos2*|V |*(*θ∗/*2) as QAOA circuit (where *p* is the circuit depth), desired. In the above formulas, we used the one applies the unitary operator *e−iβkHB* with fact that E[*X |* GW(*S*)*,* QM(*S*)] = cut(*S*) *βk* being a variational parameter (to be opti- and that the sum P *S⊆V* (cut(*S*) Pr(GW(*S*))) mized); this operator, *e−iβkHB*, can be written is simply the expected cut value of the GW as Q*n j*=1 *R*ˆ*nj,j*(2*βk*), i.e., in the *k*th stage of algorithm, which we know is at least 0.878 of the QAOA circuit, one independently rotates the optimal cut value for graphs with non- the *j*th qubit about the axis determined by its negative weights [5]. original position by angle 2*βk*.

##### B

##### Detailed Description of Custom

##### C

##### Convergence of Custom Mixers in

##### Mixer

##### xz-plane

Consider any separable state *|s*0*⟩*on *n* qubits In order to prove Proposition 1 using the adi- on the Bloch sphere, i.e., *|s*0*⟩*can be written abatic theorem, we need to show that (1) *∥s*0*⟩* in the form: is indeed the highest-energy eigenstate of the corresponding custom mixer *HB*, and (2) the *n* O difference between the largest and the second- *|s*0*⟩*= *|s*0*,j⟩,* largest eigenvalues of *H*(*t*) = (1 *−t/T*)*HB* + *j*=1 30

(*t/T*)*HC* is strictly positive. We divide this By applying Theorem 8 with the summands section into two parts to prove these two state- *HB,j* of the mixing Hamiltonian *HB*, we get ments. the desired result as shown in Proposition 3. **Proposition 3.** *Let |s*0*⟩be any separable ini-* C.1 Eigenstates of Custom Mixers *tial state and let HB be its corresponding cus- tom mixer. Then |s*0*⟩is the highest-energy* We show first that *|s*0*⟩*is the highest energy *eigenstate of HB.* eigenstate of the corresponding custom mixer for a single qubit, and then generalize to the *Proof.* Suppose for each *j* = 1*, . . . , n* we have Kronecker sums of matrices (Proposition 3). a matrix *Aj* with real eigenvalues and suppose the largest eigenvalue of *Aj* is *λj* with corre- **Lemma**
1. *Let*

*|s⟩* = cos(*θ/*2) *|*0*⟩*+ *eiϕ* sin(*θ/*2) *|*1*⟩be a single-qubit quantum state* sponding eigenvector *vj*. As a consequence of Theorem 8, we have that the largest eigen- *and let* ˆ*n* = (*x, y, z*) *be the Cartesian coordi-* value of L*n j*=1 *Aj* is P*n j*=1 *λj* with one cor- *nates of that qubit on the Bloch sphere. Let* responding eigenvector being N*n j*=1 *vj*. Let- *U* = *xσx* + *yσy* + *zσz. Then |s⟩is the most-* ting *Aj* = *HB,j* and *vj* = *|s*0*,j⟩*and apply- *excited eigenstate of U.* ing Lemma 7, we see that *|s*0*⟩*= N*n j*=1 *|s*0*,j⟩ Proof.* We have the following relationship be- is a highest-energy eigenstate for *HB* = tween the Cartesian and spherical coordi- L*n j*=1 *HB,j*. nates: *x* = cos *ϕ* sin *θ, y* = sin *ϕ* sin *θ, z* = cos *θ*. Thus, the matrix *U* = *xσx* + *yσy* + *zσz* C.2 Eigenvalue Gap For Custom Mixers is given by ï cos *θ* It is known that if the Quantum Adiabatic sin *θe−iϕ* ò *U* = *.* Algorithm is run for large enough time *T* sin *θeiϕ −*cos *θ* with time-varying Hamiltonian *H*(*t*) = (1 *− t/T*)*HB* + (*t/T*)*HC* starting with the highest- One can show that the matrix can be *PDP −*1 energy eigenstate of *H*(0) = *HB*, then one diagonalized as *U* = where *P* = [*v*1 *v*2]*, D* = diag(1*, −*1)*, v*1 = can arrive at the highest-energy eigenstate of sin(*θ/*2)*eiϕ |*1*⟩, v*2 cos(*θ/*2) *|*0*⟩* + = *H*(*T*) = *HC*, i.e. the optimal solution, pro- *−*sin(*θ/*2) *|*0*⟩*+ cos(*θ/*2)*eiϕ |*1*⟩*. vided that the gap between the largest and Thus, cos(*θ/*2) *|*0*⟩*+ sin(*θ/*2)*eiϕ |*1*⟩*is the second-largest eigenvalue of *H*(*t*) is strictly *v*1 = highest-energy eigenstate of *U*. positive for all *t < T*. This translates to find- ing an optimal solution when running QAOA We can then formulate the most-excited as we let the circuit depth *p* tend to infin- eigenstate of *U* using the following relation ity. Farhi et al. showed that this eigenvalue between eigenvalues of matrices involved in a gap was strictly positive for standard QAOA Kronecker sum and the resultant matrix. [3], thus guaranteeing convergence to the op- **Theorem 8.** *(Theorem 13.16 in [50]) Let* timal solution. In particular, they applied the *A ∈*C*n×n have eigenvalues λ*1*, . . . , λn and* following Perron-Frobenius theorem to irre- ducible stoquastic*15* matrices. *let B ∈*C*m×m have eigenvalues µ*1*, . . . , µm. Then the Kronecker sum A⊕B has mn eigen- *Theorem 9.** *[51] Let A be an irreducible values given by {λi* + *µj* : *i ∈*[*n*]*, j ∈*[*m*]*}. matrix whose entries are all real and non- Moreover, if x*1*, . . . , xp (p ≤n) are linearly negative. Let r be the spectral radius of A, i.e., independent eigenvectors of A corresponding 15*Stoquastic matrices are square matrices with real *to λ*1*, . . . , λn and z*1*, . . . , zq (q ≤m) are lin-* entries so that all of the off-diagonal entries are non- *early independent eigenvectors of B corre-* negative. Let *A* be an *n×n* square matrix. Construct *sponding to µ*1*, . . . , µq, then, for all i ∈*[*p*] a directed graph *GA* with vertex set [*n*] where the *and j ∈*[*q*]*, we have that xi ⊗zj are linearly* edge (*i, j*) is included if and only if *Aij >* 0. If *GA* is *independent eigenvectors of A⊕B correspond-* strongly connected, then we say that *A* is irreducible. Otherwise, we say that *A* is reducible. *ing to λi* + *µj.* 31

*r* = max*{|λ|* : *λ is eigenvalue of A}. Then r* the optimal solution as the circuit depth *p → is an eigenvalue of A and furthermore, it has ∞*in QAOA-warmest. Geometrically, this *algebraic multiplicity of 1.* special case corresponds to an initial separa- ble state whose qubits lie in the *xz*-plane on If the eigenvalues of an *n × n* matrix *A* are the Bloch sphere with *x >* 0. The stoquas- real (e.g. if *A* is Hermitian), then its eigen- ticity and irreducibility of this special case is values (with multiplicity) can be ordered as formalized in the following two propositions *λ*1 *≥· · · ≥λn*; if *A* is also irreducible and respectively. We include their proofs at the has real, non-negative entries then Theorem 9 end of this section, and go on to prove our ensures a gap between the two largest eigen- main result first. values (otherwise, if *λ*1 = *λ*2, then the alge- **Proposition 4.** *Let n be a positive integer.* braic multiplicity of *λ*1 would be at least 2, *For each j* = 1*, . . . , n let xj be any non-* contradicting the statement of the theorem.) *negative real number and let zj be any real* This observation still holds if we relax the non- *number. Let HB* = P*n j*=1(*xjσx j* +*zjσz j* ) *and let* negativity condition to allow negative entries *HC be the problem Hamiltonian for QAOA.* along the diagonal as seen in the following *Then H*(*t*) = (1 *−t/T*)*HB* + (*t/T*)*HC is sto-* lemma. *quastic for all* 0 *≤t ≤T. *Lemma 10.** *Let A be an irreducible stoquas- *Proposition 5.** *Let n be a positive integer. tic Hermitian matrix. Then the difference For each j* = 1*, . . . , n let xj be a positive real between the largest and second-largest eigen- number and let zj be any real real number. value of A is strictly positive. Let HB* = P*n j*=1(*xjσx j* + *zjσz j* ) *and let HC Proof.* Since *A* is stoquastic, then all of *be the problem Hamiltonian for QAOA. Then* the off-diagonal elements are already non- *H*(*t*) = (1 *−t/T*)*HB* + (*t/T*)*HC is irreducible for all* 0 *≤t < T.* negative; however, the diagonal elements may be negative. Observe that for large enough *k*, We can now prove the convergence for cus- we have that *A* + *kI* is a matrix with all non- tom mixers of the special form (P*n j*=1(*xjσx j* + negative entries. Note that *A* + *kI* is Hermi- *j* ) with *xj ∈*R+ and *zj ∈*R for *j* = *zjσz* tian (since *A* and *I* are) and thus the eigen- 1*, . . . , n*) and their corresponding initializa- values of *A* + *kI* are real. If we apply the tions as described in Proposition 1 in Section Perron-Frobenius theorem to *A* + *kI*, one ob- 2. serves that the gap between the largest and second-largest eigenvalue is strictly positive. *Proof.* By construction, the correspond- ing custom mixers will have the form One can show that the eigenvalues of *A*+*kI j* ) with *xj ∈*R+ and *zj ∈*R P*n j*=1(*xjσx j* + *zjσz* can be obtained by shifting all of the eigenval- ues of *A* by *k* (i.e. of *λ* is an eigenvalue of *A*, for *j* = 1*, . . . , n*. The result then follows from then *λ* + *k* is an eigenvalue of *A* + *kI*). More- Proposition 3, Lemma 10 (which is applicable over, the multiplicities of these shifted eigen- due to Proposition 4 and Proposition 5), and the adiabatic theorem. values are preserved. Thus, the gap between the largest and second-largest eigenvalue of Recall that for standard QAOA, we have *A* + *kI* (which is strictly positive) is equal that *HB* = P*n j*=1(1 *· σx j* + 0 *· σz j* ). Thus, the to the gap between the largest and second- fact that standard QAOA converges to the largest eigenvalue of *A*. optimal cut as *p →∞*is a special case of Propositions 4 and 5. If the custom mixer *HB* has the form *j* ) with *xj ∈*R+ and *zj ∈*R P*n j*=1(*xjσx j* + *zjσz* for *j* = 1*, . . . , n*, then one can show that *H*(*t*) is an irreducible, stoquastic matrix. Thus **Proof of Proposition 4** We first prove a by Lemma 10, the eigenvalue gap of *H*(*t*) is technical lemma that is needed in order to strictly positive meaning that one can achieve prove the proposition. 32

**Lemma 11.** *If A and B are n × n and m ×* matrix). Thus, it remains to show that *HB* is *m stoquastic matrices respectively, then so is* stoquastic. Let *HB,j* = *xjσx* +*zjσz*. Expanding *σx* and *A ⊕B. σz*, we have that *Proof.* By definition, *A⊕B* = *A⊗Im*+*In⊗B*. Since we know the sum of stoquastic matrices ï*zj xj* ò *HB,j* = *,* is stoquastic, it suffices to show that *A ⊗Im xj −zj* and *In ⊗B* is stoquastic. Observe that, which is clearly stoquastic as we assumed that *xj ≥*0. As *HB* = L*n j*=1 *HB,j*, the result now  *A*11*Im · · · A*1*nIm*  follows from Lemma 11. *... ... ... A ⊗Im* = *.*  *An*1*Im · · · AnnIm *Proof of Proposition 5** Note that for *i̸* = *j*, the *ij*th block in the *Proof.* First, we recall the definition of irre- block matrix above is *AijIm*, which contains ducible matrix. Let *A* be an *n × n* square only non-negative entries since *Aij* is an off- matrix. Construct a directed graph *GA* with diagonal element of *A* and *A* is stoquastic. vertex set [*n*] where the edge (*i, j*) is included Now consider the entries in the *ij*th block if and only if *Aij >* 0. If *GA* is strongly where *i* = *j*. Note that if there is an off- connected, then we say that *A* is irreducible. diagonal entry of *A ⊗Im* that is part of the Otherwise, we say that *A* is reducible. *ii*th block, then it is also an off-diagonal entry For any square matrix *M*, let *GM* be of that block but all the off-diagonal entries of the corresponding directed graph as de- the *ii*th block (*AiiI*) are zero. Thus, we have scribed above. Observe that *HC* (and hence shown that every off-diagonal element is non- (*t/T*)*HC*) is a diagonal matrix, thus, by the negative, thus *A ⊗Im* is stoquastic. definition of irreducibility, the irreducibility Next, observe that of (1 *−t/T*)*HB* + (*t/T*)*HC* is the same as (1 *−t/T*)*HB*. Similarly, scaling a matrix  1*B* 0*B · · ·* 0*B*  by a positive constant does not affect its ir- *... ... ...*  0*B*  reducibility, so it suffices to prove the irre- *In ⊗B* = *, ... ... ...* ducibility of *HB*. 0*B* Observe that *σx, σz* are symmetric and thus 0*B . . .* 0*B* 1*B* it is not very difficult to show that *HB* is also symmetric. This means, for the pur- which makes it clear that the off-diagonal ele- poses of showing irreducibility, *GHB* is effec- ments of *In⊗B* are either 0 or the off-diagonal tively an undirected graph and we just need elements of B which are non-negative (by sto- to show that it is connected. One can write quasticity of *B*) and thus *In ⊗B* is stoquastic. *j*=1(*xjσx* + *zjσz*) where L *HB* as *HB* = L*n* denotes the Kronecker sum. According to [52], this means that *GHB* can be written as We are now ready to prove Proposition 4. the Cartesian graph product of the graphs *Proof.* By construction *HC* (and thus *H*1*, H*2*, . . . , Hn* where *Hj* = *GAj* with *Aj* = *xjσx* + *zjσz*. Observe, that each of the *Hj*’s (*t/T*)*HC*) is a diagonal matrix (as *|b⟩*is an are connected if and only if *xj̸* = 0 which is eigenvector of *HC* for each *n*-length bitstring true by assumption. Since each of the *Hj*’s are *b*). If *HB* were stoquastic, then (1 *−t/T*)*HB* is stoquastic (as 1 *−t/T ≥*0 for 0 *≤t ≤T*) connected, then it is also the case that *GHB* and thus *H*(*t*) = (1 *−t/T*)*HB* + (*t/T*)*HC* is connected as well (see Theorem 1 of [53]) is stoquastic (as adding a diagonal matrix which finishes the proof. to a stoquastic matrix yields a stoquastic 33

##### D

##### Details on Perturbed Single-Cut

Egger et al.’s work [9]. From Proposition 4 and Theorem 1, it is clear that this approach

##### Initialization

(with non-negative weighted graphs) yields an approximation ratio approaching 0.878 for In a perturbed single-cut initialization scheme *θ∗→*0 for depth-0 QAOA and that such an with cut (*S, V \S*) and regularization angle *θ∗*, approach convergences to the optimal cut with the quantum state is given by, infinite circuit depth. *n* Recall (Section 3.1) that QAOA with a (2- O *|s*0*⟩*= *|s*0*,j⟩,* dimensional) projected GW initialization has *j*=1 a depth-0 approximation ratio of 0.658. One where, may be led to believe that, when custom mix- ers are used, that a perturbed single-cut ini- ® *RY* (*θ∗*) *|*0*⟩, j ∈S* tialization (with small regularization angle *θ∗*) *|s*0*,j⟩*= *RY* (*π −θ∗*) *|*0*⟩, j /∈S* is the better choice due to its (theoretically) better approximation ratio at depth-0. How- where *RY* (*θ*) is a single-qubit rotation about ever, as seen empirically in Section 4, this is the *y*-axis by angle *θ*. Geometrically, qubits lie not the case: when *θ∗*is small, the conver- on the *xz*-plane of the Bloch sphere (with *x >* gence rate of QAOA with single-cut initial-
1. so that they lie at an angle *θ∗*away from

izations is (empirically) incredibly slow across either the north or south pole of the Bloch all instances. For small *θ∗*, QAOA with cus- sphere, depending on which side of the cut tom mixers geometrically performs rotations (*S, V \ S*) the vertex is on. around axes that are near the poles of the In one of their approaches for Max-Cut, Eg- Bloch sphere about the qubits’ initial posi- ger et al. [9] use a mixer for QAOA that is tions; it is possible that this geometric inter- different than both the standard mixer and pretation is responsible for the slow conver- the custom mixers described in Section 2. gence for small *θ∗*. They show that their mixer has the property that, when a {perturbed single-cut initializa- D.1 Relation to QUBO Approach tion (based on a cut (*S, V \ S*)) with regu- larization parameter *θ∗*= *π/*3 is used, that Egger et al. [9] consider a warm-start ap- measurement of the depth-1 QAOA with vari- proach (which they call continuous warm- ational parameters (*γ*1*, β*1) = (0*, π* 2 ) produces started QAOA) for QUBO’s of the form exactly the cut (*S, V \S*) that was used to ini- *y∈{*0*,*1*}n yT My,* tialize the initial quantum state. The draw- min back is that, with such a mixer proposed by Egger et al., no convergence guarantees are where *M ∈*R*n×n* is a real-symmetric matrix. known and experiments suggest that, unlike They then consider the relaxation standard QAOA, the optimal cut value is not achieved in expectation with increased circuit *y∈*[0*,*1]*n yT My,* min depth. Cain et al. [8] consider the case where *θ∗*= i.e. the binary variables are relaxed to lie in 0 and the standard mixer is used. They find the interval [0*,* 1]. For certain matrices*16 M*, that such an approach performs very poorly; this yields a convex quadratic program which in particular, no convergence towards the op- can be easily solved to (global) optimality [54]; timal cut is found with increased circuit depth in this case, Egger et al. [9] find and use the either. One can also consider using a perturbed *16*In particular, Egger et al. [9] consider matrices of single-cut initialization together with the cus- the form *M* = *N* + *D* where *N ∈*R*n×n* is a (symmet- ric) positive-semidefinite matrix and *D ∈*R*n×n* is a tom mixers proposed in Section 2; this idea diagonal matrix. was very briefly explored in the appendices of 34

globally optimal solution *y∗*of the relaxation

##### E

##### Noise Simulations

to produce a separable quantum initial state. In Figure 11, we consider 20 instances of We consider this approach in the context of Erdős-Rényi graphs, with edge probabilities of Max-Cut, specifically in the case of graphs 50% and 8 nodes. In this case, we also choose with non-negative edge weights. random negative and positive edges weights One can formulate Max-Cut on a graph from a uniform distribution defined on [*−*1*,* 1]. *G* = (*V, E*) with edge weights *w* : *E →*R We show results for the ideal, noiseless case as follows [4]. Simply construct the QUBO as well as the noisy case when 3% phase noise matrix *M* by setting *Mij* = *wij* for *i̸* = *j* and *Mii* = *−*P*n j*=1 *wij* for *i ∈{*1*, . . . , n}*. If *x∗*is is present. For this noisy case, we consider only one simple source of noise, phase damp- an optimal solution to Max-Cut (using the for- ing, which is present for every single qubit gate mulation in Equation 2), then there is a corre- operation. This choice is made for simplicity sponding *y∗*that is an optimal solution of the QUBO such that *x∗ i* = 2*y∗* and the following discussion is used as a ex- *i −*1 for *i* = 1*, . . . , n*. ample of generic noise channel modelling. Observe that *M* = *−L* where *L* Lapla- As an example, we consider the modelling cian matrix of the graph *G* which is known of phase noise using Kraus operators which to be positive-semidefinite (for graphs with equivalently can be descried using noise chan- non-negative edge weights) [55]. Since *L* nels. Generically, this noise is due to interac- is positive-semidefinite, then the function *f*(*x*) = *xT Lx* is convex in *x* (as the Hessian tions with the environment which is composed of many subsystems. Each interaction itself is of *f*, *∇*2*f*(*x*) = 2*L*, is positive-semidefinite). Thus, *xT Mx* = *−f*(*x*) is generally not convex, weak, but the result of many such interactions, and hence solving min*x∈*[0*,*1]*n xT Mx* to global while not likely to cause energy transitions, does introduce a loss of phase coherence. We optimality (as is done by Egger et al. [9]) is can describe this process with a set of (non- non-trivial in the case of Max-Cut. However, unique) Kraus operators[56], given by, we can still consider locally optimal solutions to the relaxation. Observe, p 1 *−q*I*, M*0 = *y∈*[0*,*1]*n yT My* = max *y∈*[0*,*1]*n yT Ly, M*1 = *√q |*0*⟩⟨*0*| , M*2 = *√q |*1*⟩⟨*1*| ,* min where *q* is the probability of a dephasing event i.e., the QUBO relaxation amounts to maxi- occurring. These Kraus operators then have mizing a convex function over a polytope, in the effect on the state evolution as, which case, all strictly local maxima lie on the vertices of the polytope.*17* The vertices 2 *MkρM†* of the polytope [0*,* 1]*n* correspond to cuts in X *S*(*ρ*) = *k* the graph, thus, using the strictly locally op- *k*=0 =(1 *−q*)*ρ* + *q |*0*⟩⟨*0*| ρ |*0*⟩⟨*0*|* timal solution to the relaxation of the QUBO corresponding to Max-Cut degenerates to so- + *q |*1*⟩⟨*1*| ρ |*1*⟩⟨*1*| .* lutions corresponding to a single-cut; this If we associate the probability of a dephas- means that, for Max-Cut (with non-negative ing event occuring during a time interval ∆*t*, edge-weights), this QUBO approach is (effec- then *q* = Γ∆*t* with Γ being the characteristic tively) a single-cut initialization approach as dephasing rate and we can write *n* applica- described in Section 3.3. tions of the noisy channel, *S*(*ρ, t*) in matrix *17*To see this, suppose by means of contradiction form as, that *y∗*was a strict local maximum that did not lie *e−*Γ*tρ*01 at a vertex of the polytope. Then there exists *z ∈*R*n* Å *ρ*00 ã *S*(*ρ, t*) = *.* such that *y∗−z* and *y∗*+*z* lie in the polytope such that *e−*Γ*tρ*10 *ρ*11 *f*(*y∗*) *> f*(*y∗−z*) and *f*(*y∗*) *> f*(*y∗*+*z*). By convexity, *f*(*y∗*) = *f*( 1 2(*y∗−z*)+ 1 2(*y∗*+*z*)) *≤*1 2*f*(*y∗−z*)+ 1 2*f*(*y∗*+ We can then see that this dephasing process *z*) *<* 1 2*f*(*y∗*) + 1 2*f*(*y∗*) = *f*(*y∗*)*,* a contradiction. preserves population as *ρ*00*, ρ*11 are preserved 35

but exponentially suppresses coherences at a having better theoretical guarantees in re- rate defined by Γ, which also defines the de- gard to solution quality. However, numeri- phasing time, *T*2 = 1*/*Γ. cal simulations displayed in Figure 14 show both approaches on the instance library *G* In addition to modelling phase noise, we (graphs with at most 11 nodes) achieve sim- also include several other noise models in the results shown in Figures 5, 8, and 9 of the ilar expected cut values at depth *p* = 1 main text. The specifications for these noise QAOA-warmest; in particular, the difference models are generated from Qiskit’s **Noise-** in (instance-specific) approximation ratio is less than 0.04 for nearly all instances. This **Model.from_backend** method while using the “*ibm*_*guadalupe*” device as the targetted similarity in solution quality is even more pro- backend. In total, these noisy simulations uti- nounced at depth *p* = 8. lize noise models that incorporate gate error Since both warm-start approaches yield similar results (in numerical simulations) and probability of each gate, the gate length of all since the Burer-Monteiro approach scales bet- gates, the *T*1 and *T*2 times of all qubits, as well as the readout error probability. Each gate er- ter in regards to runtime (Section 3), the re- ror consists of a **deploarizing_error()** fol- sults in Section 4 assumes that locally opti- lowed by a **thermal_relaxation_error()** mal BM-MC*k* solutions are used to produce the warm-starts for QAOA-warm and QAOA- error channel. One can define similar Kraus operators for these noise channels as well [56]. warmest. However, while these are a comprehensive treatment of quantum noise they do not accu- F.2 Choice of Dimension and Rotation rately capture crosstalk and other correlated Table 6 demonstrates the average (instance- noise sources. specific) approximation ratio achieved by As mentioned in the main text, we apply QAOA-warmest for various combinations of a SPAM mitigation strategy to our hardware the dimension used for BM-MC*k* and the rota- results from IBM. Typically these SPAM er- tion scheme applied to the BM-MC*k* solution. rors can vary significantly across qubits on We find that vertex-at-top rotations perform a single device. Specifically, typical readout better than uniform rotations, especially in errors on the *ibmq*_*guadalupe* device range the context of *k* = 3 solutions. The data is in- from [1*.*07%*,* 12*.*95%]. Since the overall re- conclusive in regards to if *k* = 2 or *k* = 3 solu- sult is limited by the largest, worst case er- tions are better for QAOA-warmest, both are ror, for simplicity, we only mitigate SPAM promising. Finally, we remark that for depth- errors due to the fact that these errors are 8 QAOA-warmest, any choice of dimension or roughly an order of magnitude larger than rotation scheme gave at least a 0.996 average gate errors on the same device as well as re- approximation ratio across the instances. quiring only two additional circuit runs (in- To give fair comparison against QAOA- dependent of circuit width or depth) and warm [31] (and also for comparisons with Eg- do not implement any gate error mitigation ger et al.’s approach [9]), the results in Section strategies, which typically require significantly 4 assumes that we are using *k* = 2 initializa- larger overhead [57, 58]. tions and vertex-at-top rotations unless other- wise stated, since these were the recommended

##### F

##### Additional Numerical Results

setting in [31]. F.1 GW vs BM-MC Warm-Starts F.3 GW and BM-MC Scaling As described in Section 3, we consider two In Section 3, two methods of creating a warm- approaches for generating warm-starts: pro- start initialization are discussed: projecting jected GW solutions and locally optimal BM- GW SDP solutions and finding approximate MC*k* solutions, with the former approach BM-MC*k* solutions. Figure 12 uses instances 36

depth *p* = 1 depth *p* = 8

|  | vert. | uniform |
| --- | --- | --- |
| k = 2 | 0.9858 | 0.9758 |
| k = 3 | 0.9854 | 0.9535 |

|  | vert. | uniform |
| --- | --- | --- |
| k = 2 | 0.9988 | 0.9977 |
| k = 3 | 0.9988 | 0.9960 |

all graphs

|  | vert. | uniform |
| --- | --- | --- |
| k = 2 | 0.9867 | 0.9789 |
| k = 3 | 0.9864 | 0.9581 |

|  | vert. | uniform |
| --- | --- | --- |
| k = 2 | 0.9991 | 0.9990 |
| k = 3 | 0.9993 | 0.9981 |

positive-weight graphs Table 6: Multiple tables comparing the average (instance-specific) approximation ratio achieved during QAOA-warmest when utilizing different combinations of dimension and rotations during the preprocessing stage. For the top row of tables, these averages were computed using all the graphs in our graph library *G* whereas for the bottom row, we restrict our attention to only those graphs in *G* with positive edge weights. from the MQLib [4] library*18* to compare these two methods at different dimensions (*k* = 2*,* 3) with respect to the (instance-specific) approx- imation ratio they achieve with hyperplane rounding; these approximation ratios are com- pared against hyperplane rounding of the *n*- dimensional GW solution. It is clear from the figure that the projecting of GW solutions pre- serves the approximation ratio (from hyper- plane rounding); this is consistent with the results of Theorem 2. On the other hand, while BM-MC*k* solutions preserve the approx- imation ratio (from hyperplane rounding) for small graphs, the gap in approximation ratios Figure 14: Histogram showing the difference in (compared to *n*-dimensional GW hyperplane (instance-specific) approximation ratio (AR) when us- rounding) grows as the number of nodes in- ing QAOA-warmest (on instance library *G*) with various warm-start strategies: projected GW and locally optimal creases. BM-MC warm-starts. The blue and red bars correspond to depth *p* = 1 and *p* = 8 QAOA-warmest respectively with the purple regions indicating an overlap in the his- F.4 Interesting Instances tograms. For both approaches, *k* = 3 solutions and vertex-at-top rotations are used to produce the figure; In Section 4.2, Table 2 shows that at circuit the results are similar if one instead uses a different com- depth *p* = 8, there are five instances for which bination of dimension and/or rotation scheme. QAOA-warmest did not achieve the highest (instance-specific) approximation ratio com- pared to the other algorithms considered. Of these five instances, standard QAOA was *18*MQLib [4] is a diverse library of Max-Cut in- stances; the results of Figure 12 may differ if differ- ent types/families of graphs are used (e.g. random Erdős–Rényi graphs). For each MQLib instance, we used the exact Max-Cut solver BiqCrunch [59] to try to find the optimal cut. Figure 12 uses all positive- weighted MQLib instances up to 663 nodes for which BiqCrunch was able to find the optimal cut within 24 hours. 37

the best algorithm for precisely two of these ational parameters: (1) near the origin and (instances #778 and #1820). For the remain-
1. the choice of parameters that recovers the

ing three instances (#1698, #1889, #2010), value of cut used to initialize the QAOA vari- GW was the best algorithm; however, all three ant (i.e. *β*1 = *π/*2 with the remaining pa- of these instances have the property that there rameters being set to zero). In both cases, is a single negative edge-weight whose mag- Figure 13 demonstrates that QAOA-warmest nitude is much larger than the other edge typically has the superior performance. weights in the graph and additional numerical There are a total of 163 instances for which simulations show that a suitable vertex-at-top the approximation ratio achieved by depth-8 rotation (selecting the vertex that is incident QAOA-warmest beats GW (by at least 0.001) to the large-magnitude negative edge weight) and the approximation ratio achieved by GW allows QAOA-warmest to outperform GW. beats Egger et al.’s approach (with initializa- Table 4 gives detailed statistics for the ap- tion *β*1 = *π/*2 with the remaining parame- ters being set to zero) at depth-8 (by at least proximation ratios achieved by each of the Max-Cut algorithms considered for these five 0.001). For these instances, the median gap in instances. approximation ratio between QAOA-warmest and GW was 0.0466 and the median gap in approximation ratio between GW and Egger F.5 Comparison with Egger et al. et al.’s approach is 0.0458. Figure 13 compares the (instance-specific) approximation ratios achieved by QAOA-

##### G

##### Twenty-Node Graph

warmest and a variant of QAOA considered by Egger et al. [9]. In the context of the Max-Cut In this section, we discuss why the graph con- problem, Egger et al. considered an approach sidered in Figure 6 is interesting. The graph which takes a good starting cut (*S, V \S*) (ob- used is a 20-node instance, where Goemans- tained via GW or possibly other means) and Williamson achieves an (instance-specific) ap- uses this cut to construct an initial quantum proximation ratio of 0.912. We briefly sum- state *|s*0*⟩*. With this modified initial quantum marize the construction and properties of this state and an appropriate modification of the graph. mixing Hamiltonian, Egger et al. show that Recall that the worst-case approximation their variation of QAOA is able to recover the ratio for the Goemans-Williamson (GW) al- cut at circuit depth *p* = 1, i.e., there is a choice gorithm is 0.878. Karloff [42] showed that the of variational parameters *γ*1 and *β*1 such that 0.878 bound for GW is tight by constructing a the only cut obtained at those parameters is family of graphs whose (instance-specific) ap- precisely (*S, V \ S*). proximation ratios approaches 0.878 as graph To give a fair comparison for Egger et al.’s size increases. The construction for this fam- approach, we consider 10 cuts generated by ily of instances is as follows: consider non- the GW algorithm and take the best 5. Due negative integers *b ≤t ≤m* and let *J*(*m, t, b*) to the size of the instances we consider, usu- denote the graph with vertex set (*m* ), i.e., the *t* ally at least one of the best 5 cuts would vertices are all *t*-element subsets of [*m*]; two be optimal and hence Egger et al.’s approach distinct vertices/subsets *S* and *T* of *J*(*m, t, b*) would essentially already start with an opti- are adjacent if and only if they have exactly *b* mal solution which is not interesting. For this elements in common, i.e. *|S ∩T|* = *b*. Karloff reason, in Figure 13, we only consider those proved the approximation ratio for GW on instances (22.7% of the instance library) for some of these instances: which neither QAOA-warmest or Egger et al.’s approach starts with the optimal solution. **Theorem 12.** *[42] Let m be an even positive* For Egger et al.’s approach, we consider two *integer and G* = *J*(*m, m/*2*, b*)*. If* 0 *≤b ≤* different choices for initialization of the vari- *m/*12*, then the (instance-specific) approxima-* 38

| Instance | # Nodes | # Edges | Approx. Ratio |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| J(6, 3, 1) J(8, 4, 1) J(10, 5, 1) J(10, 5, 2) J(12, 6, 1) J(12, 6, 2) | 20 70 252 252 924 924 | 90 560 3150 12600 16632 103950 | 0.9123 0.8889 0.8810 0.9402 0.8787 0.9123 |

Table 7: Small (*<* 1000 nodes) instances using Karloff’s [42] construction. For each instance, we include the number of nodes, edges, and the theoretical expected approximation ratio one would obtain using Goemans-Williamson algorithm on that instance. *tion ratio for Goemans-Williamson on G is *Theorem 14.** *(Theorem 3.10 in [60]) Let* 0 *≤ b < t and let20 given by π* arccos(4*b* 1 *m −*1) *.* 1 *−*2*b s* Ç åÇ *t −r* åÇ *m −t −s* + *r* å *m s* X (*−*1)*s−r βs* = *. r t −b m −*2*t* + *b* Non-trivial instances using Karloff’s con- *r*=0 struction arises once *b ≥*1; however, in order *Then β*1 *is the smallest eigenvalue of the ad-* for the hypotheses of Theorem 12 to be satis- *jacency matrix of J*(*m, t, b*) *if and only if* fied, this requires *m ≥*12 which implies that (*t −b*)(*m −*1) *≥t*(*m −t*)*. In this case, β*1 one needs to consider instances with at least ) = 924 nodes. Performing reliable exper- *is also the second largest in absolute value* (12 6 *among the eigenvalues of the adjacency ma-* iments on such large instances is not feasible *trix of J*(*m, t, b*)*.* for current quantum hardware. We noticed that smaller instances with a Conjecture 13 allows us to relax the inequal- weak (instance-specific) GW approximation ity in Theorem 12 to 0 *≤b < m/*4; thus, ratio could be constructed if the following con- it can be applied with *m* = 6 and *b* = 1 to jecture by Karloff was true. obtain the graph *J*(6*,* 3*,* 1) (used in Figure 5) ) = 20 nodes where GW achieves an with ( 6 6*/*2 **Conjecture 13.** *(Conjecture 2.12 in [42])* (instance-specific) approximation ratio of *If m is an even positive integer with* 0 *≤ b < m/*4*, then the smallest eigenvalue π* arccos(4 1 6 *−*1) = 0*.*912*. of the adjacency matrix of J*(*m, m/*2*, b*) *is* 1 *−*2 )2 ( 4*b* 6 (*m/*2 *m −*1)*. b* Table 7 shows all non-trivial instances un- Karloff [42] proved a special case of this der 1000 nodes that use Karloff’s [42] con- conjecture in the case where 0 *≤b ≤m/*12 struction for which we can calculate the ap- which was instrumental in showing Theorem proximation ratio using Theorem 12 and Con- 12 (with the same inequality in the hypothe- jecture 13. These instances may be of interest ses). to those working with near-term quantum de- In 2018, Brouwer et al. [60] proved the fol- vices. lowing theorem below; substituting *t* = *m/*2 into Theorem 14 and performing a few simple calculations, they also found that Conjecture 13 follows as a corollary.*19 19*The statement of Theorem 14 has been modified *20*The eigenvalues of the adjacency matrix of in order to be consistent with the notation used in *J*(*m, t, b*) are *β*0*, β*1*, . . . , βt* (each with positive mul- Karloff’s construction [42]. tiplicity) [61]. 39
