# ThSaMa24

## Approximating under the Influence

## of Quantum Noise and Compute Power

Simon Thelen Hila Safi Wolfgang Mauerer *Technical University of Siemens AG, Technology Technical University of Applied Science Regensburg Technical University of Applied Science Regensburg* Regensburg, Germany *Applied Science Regensburg Siemens AG, Technology* simon.thelen@othr.de Munich, Germany Regensburg/Munich, Germany hila.safi@siemens.com wolfgang.mauerer@othr.de will be integrated into HPC (or embedded or special-purpose) ***Abstract*****—The quantum approximate optimisation algorithm (QAOA) and its variants are at the core of many scenarios** architectures to accelerate specific tasks such as optimisation **that aim at combining the power of quantum computers (QC)** or simulation. This hybrid approach will allow HPC systems **and classical high-performance computing (HPC) appliances for** to leverage the strengths of both, quantum and classical **combinatorial optimisation. Several obstacles challenge concrete** computing, and will likely extend into the post-NISQ era. **benefits now and in the foreseeable future: Imperfections quickly** Variational quantum algorithms such as the quantum ap- **degrade algorithmic performance below practical utility; over- heads arising from alternating between classical and quantum** proximate optimisation algorithm (QAOA) are at the forefront **primitives can counter any advantage; and the choice of param-** of current research [3]. QAOA uses a multi-layer, structured **eters or algorithmic variant can substantially influence runtime** variational quantum circuit to find approximate solutions for **and result quality. Selecting the appropriate combination is a non-** a broad class of optimisation problems with many industrial **trivial issue, as it not only depends on end-user requirements, but also on details of the hardware and software stack.** applications. The more layers are used, the better the algorithm **Appropriate automation can alleviate the burden of choos-** can approximate the optimal solution under ideal conditions. **ing optimal combinations for end-users: They should not be** However, a deeper circuit on NISQ systems also increases **required to understand technicalities like detail differences be-** the number of circuit parameters, execution time and, per- **tween QAOA variants, required number of QAOA layers, or** haps most importantly, susceptibility to noise. To complicate **necessary measurement samples. Yet, they should receive the** matters further, HPC engineers can choose between different **best possible satisfaction of their non-functional requirements, be it performance or other. We determine factors that influence** QAOA variants such as warm-starting QAOA (WSQAOA) [4] **approximation quality and temporal behaviour of four QAOA** or recursive QAOA (RQAOA) [5, 6]. These address noise by **variants using comprehensive density-matrix-based numerical** putting a stronger focus on the classical part of the algorithm. **simulations targeting three widely studied optimisation problems.** Depending on the specific use-case, different non-functional **Our simulations consider ideal quantum computation, and a continuum of scenarios troubled by realistic imperfections.** requirements such as required solution quality, execution time **Our quantitative results, accompanied by a comprehensive** or noise resistance must be taken into account. This results **reproduction package, show strong performance differences be-** in a number of potential trade-offs that must be carefully **tween QAOA variants that can be pinpointed to narrow and** considered to put QAOA to good use in HPC environments. It **specific effects. We identify influential co-variables and relevant** is not obvious a-priori which variant performs best for which **non-functional quality goals that, as we argue, mark the rele-** task, given the constraints of NISQ hardware and the desired **vant ingredients for designing appropriate software engineering abstraction mechanisms and automated tool-chains for devising** result quality. Ideally, selecting a suitable QAOA variant **quantum solutions from higher-level problem specifications.** should be done automatically by the compiler or runtime ***Index Terms*****—QAOA, quantum noise, QC/HPC integration,** environment. However, the effects of noise on QAOA are not **design automation** fully understood, especially for non-standard variants of the algorithm. To the best of our knowledge, no comprehensive I. INTRODUCTION study compares different QAOA variants under noise. Quantum computers have the potential to solve certain Our work, which is accompanied by a code repository and problems exponentially faster than classical computers. How- a reproduction package (links in PDF), aims to address this ever, the capabilities of current noisy intermediate-scale quan- knowledge gap by examining the effect of factors like QAOA tum (NISQ) systems are limited by the influence of quantum variant, number of layers, and noise strength on the non- noise that severely disturbs any quantum computation [1], functional properties of programs in HPC systems augmented and by the small number of available qubits, which inhibits with NISQ hardware. We use density-matrix-based numerical quantum error correction [2] for now. Given the quantum- simulations to analyse solution quality and execution times classical structure of NISQ-era algorithms, it is plausible that of four QAOA variants on three widely studied optimisation rather than replacing existing systems, quantum computers problems. Our objective is to identify factors with the strongest

largest absolute expected value *|E*[*t*]*|* according to sampling influence on non-functional quality goals, to guide the design and development of appropriate abstraction mechanisms and results is selected, and constraint *t* = sign(*E*[*t*]) is inserted into the Hamiltonian by substituting *si* = *±*1 or *si* = *±sj*, automatic tools based on high-level problem descriptions. which eliminates one variable. This process of using QAOA to II. CONTEXT AND FOUNDATION find the “most conclusive” term is iterated until the problem *A. Subject Problems* becomes trivial to solve. Finally, a solution that satisfies all We study the performance of multiple QAOA variants using encountered constraints is selected. three NP-complete optimisation problems: Max-Cut (which III. RELATED WORK seeks to partition the vertices of an undirected graph into two disjoint sets *S* and *T* such that the number of edges between QAOA [3] is among the most prevalent algorithms consid- *S* and *T* is minimised), Partition (which seeks to distribute ered for NISQ devices. A wide range of efforts focuses on op- a set of numbers into disjoint subsets *S* and *T* such that the timising QAOA for available quantum hardware, particularly absolute difference between the sum of numbers in *S* and to mitigate the effect of high error rates. Modifications to both, *T* is minimised) and Vertex Cover (which seeks to find the structure of the quantum circuit (*e.g.*, Refs. [5, 12–15]) and smallest vertex subset *C* of an undirected graph such that for classical optimisation procedure (*e.g.*, Refs. [4, 11, 16–20]) every edge (*u, v*) in the graph, either *u ∈C* or *v ∈C*). have been proposed. We cannot consider the abundance of The subject problems (a) are well-understood, with many choices, but focus on typical variants, as described above: applications, (b) have efficient encodings with only one qubit WSQAOA [4], WS-Init-QAOA [11] and RQAOA [5]. per vertex (Max-Cut, Vertex Cover) or number (Partition), As for quantum noise, Georgopoulos *et al.* [21] present an and (c) differ considerably in their hardness of approximation: approach to simulate effects of three error types using quantum A fully polynomial-time approximation scheme is known for channels, and align the model with experimental observations. Partition [7], but the best-known approximation ratios are Greiwe *et al.* [22] investigate the effects of imperfections on 0.878 for Max-Cut [8] and 2 for Vertex Cover [9]. quantum algorithms. Xue *et al.* [23] confirm the effectiveness of hybrid algorithms on NISQ devices by studying effects of *B. QAOA and its variants* quantum noise on standard QAOA. Marshall *et al.* [24] provide QAOA finds approximate solutions to combinatorial opti- an approximate model for fidelity and expected cost given misation problems [3]. The basic algorithm seeks parameters noise rate, system size, and circuit depth. *s* to minimise *C*(*s*) = *−*P *i<j Jijsisj −*P *i hisi* of a Integrating QC in HPC environments poses challenges, and quadratic binary unconstrained objective function (QUBO) comprehensive software stacks to address these are being with *si* = *±*1 and *Jij, hi ∈*R. Many NP-complete optimisa- designed and implemented [25–31]; alas, we cannot review all tion problems, including our subject problems, have efficient in detail. Bandic *et al.* [28] survey QC full-stacks, highlighting QUBO encodings [10]. A QAOA circuit first prepares an the need for tight co-design and vertical integration between initial state, typically *|*+*⟩n*, and applies a series of unitaries: software and hardware. Auto-tuning in HPC environments *e−*i*βpHM e−*i*γpHC . . . e−*i*β*1*HM e−*i*γ*1*HC*, where *p* chooses the was studied by Hoefler *et al.* [32]. Wintersperger *et al.* [33] number of *layers*. *HC* is the *problem Hamiltonian* (or sep- and Safi *et al.* [34] study the influence of parameters like arator, as it separates solution space from search space by a communication latencies and adapted topologies in HPC/QC complex phase), with *HC|x⟩*= *C*((*−*1)*x*1*, . . . ,* (*−*1)*xn*)*|x⟩*. systems. Elsharkawy *et al.* [30] assess the suitability of *i X*(*i*) is called the *mixer Hamiltonian*, which *HM* = P quantum programming tools for integration with classical influences the quantum state to explore the search space. HPC frameworks. Close integration of classical and quantum Optimal parameters *βi, γi* (1 *≤i ≤p*) are found through aspects is a paramount desire in most studies. multiple circuit evaluations using a classical optimiser. More layers improve, in principle, results at the expense of runtime, IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP but also amplify NISQ noise, which decreases solution quality. Warm-starting QAOA variants alter the initial state and/or We compare the ideal and noisy performance of different mixer Hamiltonian using a known initial guess for the solution. QAOA variants using density matrix-based, numerical simu- This can improve result quality, especially at low depths [4]. lations. We use the Eviden Qaptiva 800 quantum simulation We consider two variants: For WS-Init-QAOA, given an platform and its proprietary software library *QLM* that includes approximate solution *z∗∈{−*1*,* +1*}n*, we use N *i RY* (*θi*)*|*0*⟩* a high-performance noisy circuit simulator. Different numbers with *θi* = 2 arcsin (p 0*.*5 *−*0*.*25*z∗* ) of layers (*p ∈{*1*,* 2*,* 3*,* 4*}*) are investigated for each variant. as the initial state instead *i* of *|*+*⟩n* [11]. For WSQAOA, in addition to the altered initial We will analyse performance on random instances of the three problems *Max-Cut*, *Partition* and *Vertex Cover*: For Max-Cut state, we also change the time-evolved mixer Hamiltonian to N *i RY* (*−θi*)*RZ*(*−*2*β*)*RY* (*θi*) [4]. and Vertex Cover, 600 random graphs are considered, 100 for each *n ∈{*5*,* 6*,* 7*,* 8*,* 9*,* 10*}*. These graphs are created Recursive QAOA (RQAOA) [5, 6] samples the circuit with the final parameters*⃗β* and*⃗γ* after QAOA execution. Then, by inserting an edge between every pair of vertices with the individual terms of the Hamiltonian *T* = *{si* : *hi̸* = probability *p* = 0*.*5. For Partition, 100 sets of numbers are 0*} ∪{sisj* : *Jij̸* = 0*}* are considered: Term *t ∈T* with the considered for every size *n ∈{*5*,* 6*,* 7*,* 8*,* 9*,* 10*}*. Each number

is drawn uniformly at random from the interval [0*,* 1]. To ob- errors (*dD*) and thermal relaxation (*d*TR) as discussed in Sec- tain more accurate data, the algorithms are run multiple times tion IV-B. As a simplifying assumption, we assume all qubits on each instance, averaging the results. For all variants, SciPy’s share identical imperfection characteristics. COBYLA optimiser with a tolerance of 1 % and 150 maximum *√* iterations is used as the classical parameter optimiser [35, 36]. C–*X RZ X T*1 *T*2 The warm-starting variants use approximate solutions obtained from the Goemans-Williamson algorithm for Max-Cut [8], Gate error 0 % 0.03 % 1 % greedy list scheduling for Partition [37] and the classic two- Duration *|* Time 0 ns 35 ns 400 ns 100 µs 150 µs approximation algorithm vor Vertex Cover [38]. TABLE I: Baseline noise parameters. To compare algorithm performance, we consider *approxi- mation quality*, here defined as the ratio between the obtained solution and the optimal solution for a problem-specific mea- Table I shows our baseline parameters: They represent sure (Max-Cut: size of the cut; Partition: cardinality of the median values obtained from the 46 IBM QPUs whose data smaller set; Vertex Cover: reciprocal number of vertices in are available from fake backends. For each backend, we take the cover1). A approximation quality of 1 corresponds to the the median over all qubits, and then obtain the median over optimal, and 0 to the worst possible solution. backend medians to ensure that systems with more qubits are Using density-matrix-based simulations is computation- not disproportionately represented. *T*1 and *T*2 are rounded to ally more expensive than other alternatives, but allows us 5 µs, gate times to 5 ns and gate errors to one significant digit. to obtain *exact* values for *⟨ψ|HC|ψ⟩*—the expected en- These values represent the current state of the art in transmonic ergy of the problem Hamiltonian—in noisy simulations. For NISQ devices. For lack of space, we cannot include other QAOA, WSQAOA and WS-Init-QAOA, we obtain the average architectures, but our simulations can be easily performed for value (and average approximation quality) of the solution them using the reproduction package [43] (link in PDF). from the measurement probabilities of the output state. For The *average fidelity* of a quantum channel measures how RQAOA, this approach is not possible since the algorithm much it alters its input. It lies in the interval [2*−n,* 1] where delivers only a single outcome per design, which we need *n* is the number of qubits the channel acts upon. An average to appropriately account for. During RQAOA, when using a fidelity of 1 means that the channel leaves its input unchanged, reasonably small sample size, we cannot expect to always find an average fidelity of 2*−n* represents a complete loss of the term *t* with maximum *|E*[*t*]*|*. Therefore, we do not use the information. Our model interprets the empirically determined exact measurement probabilities to find the most “conclusive” gate error as one minus its average fidelity. We assume this term. Instead, we consider a constant sample size of ten. As infidelity to be caused by both error types, which we model shown below, this still achieves good results. as depolarising noise and thermal relaxation. After each logical single-qubit gate, we insert a thermal *A. Noise Model* relaxation channel, parameterised by *T*1, *T*2 and gate dura- The Qiskit noise model is widely used [21, 22, 39], and tion *t*, followed by a depolarising channel. The depolarising accounts for dominant noise in IBM quantum systems, featur- probability *p* is set such that the average fidelity of the ing good agreement with actual quantum hardware [21, 40]. composed channel matches the model parameters (the required We implemented this model on top of QLM’s noisy circuit probability can be derived analytically [22, 44]). After each simulator, but additionally allow for changing the strength of two-qubit gate, one thermal relaxation channel is inserted for the individual noise sources. Quantum channels describe each involved qubit, followed by a two-qubit depolarising *• Gate errors:* Quantum gates can never be implemented channel (again, we choose parameters so that the combined channel matches the desired fidelity). Due to two-qubit gate perfectly. This manifests itself in the fact that instead dependencies, some qubits might not be subject to any gate of the desired unitary, a different, unknown unitary or during *idle periods*. These are represented by a thermal non-unitary operator is applied instead. Gate errors are relaxation channel parameterised by *T*1, *T*2, and idle duration. modelled using depolarising channels, which with some *√* depolarising probability *p* replace the state of the affected { *X,* C–*X* } We assume a native gate set *RZ,* , as it is qubits by the maximally mixed state [41]. supported by many transmon devices, and transpile from *• Thermal relaxation:* Even if the qubit is not involved logical to native circuits by substituting single-qubit gates. in any quantum gates, its state slowly transitions to the While not all NISQ machines support C–*X* gates natively (*e.g.*, thermal equilibrium state *|*0*⟩*over time [41, 42]. the IBM Eagle), equivalents (up to single-qubit rotations) exist on all architectures. Since two-qubit gate imperfections The model is parameterised by (a) longitudinal (*T*1) and usually exceeds single-qubit gate imperfections, any additional transverse (*T*2) relaxation time, (b) gate error and duration single-qubit gates that arise from substituting C–*X* should not for each gate type (*e.g.*, *RZ* or C–*X*), (c) strength of gate meaningfully affect our results. *RZ* gates are noiseless, as they are virtual on transmon systems [45], and Misra-Gries edge 1Invalid Vertex Cover solutions are replaced with the trivial vertex cover colouring [46] orders terms in *H*C to minimise circuit depth. using the entire vertex set.

*B. Strength of Noise* systems, with a particular focus on the effect of imperfections on solution quality and runtime. Figure 1 summarises our Recall that noise strengths are controlled via parameters general observations: It shows average approximation quality, *dD* and *dT R*. Specifically, *dD* scales the probability *p* of all dependent on an increasing number of layers *p* and averaged depolarising channels, *dT R* scales the time parameter *t* of over the problem size *n*, as well as depending on *n* and all thermal relaxation channels. A value of 1 corresponds to averaged over *p*, for two corner cases: Full IBM Q device the baseline noise level, whereas a value of 0 disables the noise, and the noiseless case. Overall, RQAOA performs noise source. Intuitively, depolarising and thermal relaxation best and standard QAOA worst in the ideal and the noisy noise lead to a decrease of the state’s quality (as measured by cases. WSQAOA and WS-Init-QAOA ranked second and third, fidelity with the desired optimal state), which is exponential respectively. Although, as expected, all variants perform worse in the circuit’s depth. The average fidelity of the depolarising in the noisy case, there is a clear difference in performance 1*/*2 + 1*/*2 *· e−t/T*1 if *T*1 = *T*2, and *dD* is a channel is deterioration; particularly, RQAOA is more robust than other scaling factor of the decay constant (1*/T*1) [41, 44]. Likewise, variants. For an increasing number of layers, the better result the average fidelity after *k*-fold application of the single- quality in the noiseless case competes with a larger amount qubit depolarising channel with depolarisation probability *p* is 1*/*2 + 1*/*2 *· ek* ln(1*−p*) [47]. As ln(1 *−p*) *≈p* for *p ≪*1, *dD* of sustained noise. For IBM Q devices, detrimental effects usually exceed improvements, and using two QAOA layers again scales the decay constant for small *p*. instead of one shows only an improvement for standard QAOA *C. Runtime estimation* and RQAOA. For the two warm-starting variants, the added power of a second layer does not outweigh the additional To estimate circuit execution time, we use gate durations noise. While WSQAOA is slightly more affected, the effect given in Table I, and a median measurement time of 4.09 µs of noise is mostly comparable across the other variants. obtained from fake backends. We assume 1000 circuit evalu- It appears reasonable that RQAOA is less disturbed by ations per iteration. Measurements on the Qaptiva 800 deter- noise: Instead of trying to approximate an optimal solution mine efforts for parameter optimisation, circuit transpilation, directly, RQAOA iteratively finds the most “conclusive” con- or finding initial values for warm-starting variants. straint and adds it to the Hamiltonian. This way, it finds the most highly correlated pair of variables in every step, which

|  | Simulation |  |  | Ideal |  | Noisy |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| Bound |  | Classical Approximation |  |  |  |  | Random |

are then fixed and not affected by future influence of noise. WSQAOA struggles to benefit from adding more layers, even in the ideal case, which we attribute to the limitations of the

| Max-Cut |  |
| --- | --- |
| By layers | By qubits |

| Partition |  |
| --- | --- |
| By layers | By qubits |

| Vertex Cover |  |
| --- | --- |
| By layers | By qubits |

relatively “weak” classical optimiser. Figure 2 compares solution quality and runtime for IBM Q 1.0 0.9 noise levels. Each data point represents average approximation QAOA 0.8 0.7 quality and runtime of an algorithm with *p ∈*[1*,* 4] layers 0.6 Approximation Quality for 100 problem instances with the same number of qubits. 1.0 0.9

|  |  |  |  |  | RQAOA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

We observe that (a) RQAOA is consistently best in terms 0.8 0.7 of solution quality, albeit at the expense of runtime, since it 0.6 executes QAOA multiple times, (b) differences in intra-algo- 1.0

|  |  |  |  |  | WS-Init-QA |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |

0.9 rithm execution times are mostly negligible for non-RQAOA 0.8 0.7 variants, (c) approximation quality decreases, for increasing 0.6 problem dimension, at markedly different rates depending on 1.0 0.9 the subject problem, and specific to each algorithm, (d) said WSQAOA 0.8 0.7 decrease follows, from visual observation, a characteristic 0.6 trend, (e) distinct clusters arise that are connected to the 1 2 3 4 6 8 10 1 2 3 4 6 8 10 1 2 3 4 6 8 10 amount of layers. Assuming this behaviour remains valid for # QAOA layers *p* resp. # Qubits *n* larger instances (which is, of course, not guaranteed [48]), the clustering presents an opportunity to select suitable execution Fig. 1: Average approximation quality, separated by number parameters prior to payload execution. of QAOA layers and averaged over number of qubits and vice Finally, we consider the continuum between the noise-free versa, on random problem instances, for ideal and noisy eval- case and IBM Q imperfection levels: Figure 3 shows under uation. Dashed grey lines: lower bound (random guess). Solid what conditions adding an extra layer improves performance. grey lines: initial warm-start estimate. Green background: We use relative advantage (*i.e.*, the ratio of *p* layer performance QAOA variant outperforms classical approximation algorithm. over *p −*1 layer performance) averaged over all subject prob- lem instances. For moderate noise, standard QAOA benefits V. EVALUATION from adding a second or third layer, as does WS-Init-QAOA Our core concern is to understand how non-functional when adding a second. However, this depends on the subject properties of QAOA variants affect their integration into HPC problem: Partition is less resistant to noise than Max-Cut and

| ayers 1 | 2 3 |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| WSQAOA | WS-Init-QAO | A | RQAOA |

| Partition |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |
|  |  |  |

| Vertex Cover |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |

Max-Cut Approximation Quality 1.0 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.25 0.50 1.00 2.00 4.00 8.00 16.00 0.25 0.50 1.00 2.00 4.00 8.00 16.00 0.25 0.50 1.00 2.00 4.00 8.00 16.00 Runtime [s, log] Fig. 2: Runtime versus approximation quality for noisy simulation. Each point represents an average over 100 instances for a given number of qubits; point size increases with instance size respectively qubit count (five to ten). that can be pinpointed to specific causes. This suggests that Relative layer advantage 0.95 1.00 1.05 augmenting software stacks with capabilities to automatically select optimal QAOA variants with an appropriate number of Max-Cut Partition Vertex Cover layers for a given problem, based on non-functional criteria 2nd layer 3rd layer 2nd layer 3rd layer 2nd layer 3rd layer such as solution quality, latency, or quantum runtime is a 1.0 possible and useful endeavour. Our data suggest that in noisy QAOA 0.5 environments, RQAOA has the potential to achieve better Thermal relaxation noise 0.0 results than other variants, at the cost of a much longer 1.0 runtime. They also indicate that for most QAOA variants, RQAOA 0.5 the computational benefit of a second layer is often greatly 0.0 reduced or even eliminated by the added noise of the deeper 1.0 WS-Init-QAOA quantum circuits. The considerable computational cost of 0.5 simulating noisy quantum circuits allowed us to only consider 0.0 problems with up to ten qubits. Nonetheless, we believe that 1.0 WSQAOA results for relatively small instances may indicate general 0.5 trends, although this needs further confirmation. If our expec- 0.0 tation hold true, another possible approach to (semi-)automatic 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 0.0 0.5 1.0 Depolarising noise algorithm selection could be to probe smaller dummy instances at compile time or runtime to inform the selection for real Fig. 3: Relative advantage of a second and third QAOA layer problem instances. depending on noise strength. Blue cells: performance increase; Automatic algorithm selection needs to distinguish between red cells: worse performance with added layer(s). problem-independent and problem-specific elements, and ab- stractions for deploying quantum algorithms such as QAOA in HPC systems need to take this into account. While the trade- Vertex Cover. A likely reason is that circuits for Partition off between solution quality and runtime remains relatively contain more C–*X* gates than those for Max-Cut or Vertex consistent across the three subject problems when considering Cover instances: For Partition, there is one C–*X* gate for every the algorithm and noise dimensions, the situation becomes pair of qubits; for Max-Cut and Vertex Cover there is one C–*X* more nuanced when examining different numbers of QAOA for each graph edge, which amounts to roughly half the pairs, layers. The point at which an additional layer does not yield since for each pair, an edge is inserted with 50 % probability. performance improvements depends on the problem itself It is notable that in the majority of cases, relative advantage and on other factors like noise level or problem size. Other is consistently *either* negative *or* positive for a given combina- aspects—for instance, the impact of problem encodings [49, tion of algorithm and problem. A change in trend depending on 50] or noise caused by swap gates required because of limited noise strength is rare. This suggests that choosing the optimal connectivity [34]—, should also be considered. More research number of layers does not need to take into account hardware beyond our results is needed to understand the effect of noise details. problem-specific aspects such as classical approximability on VI. DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION the optimal hyper-parameters of different QAOA variants. Our results show pronounced differences between the To enjoy QC in HPC environments without the need for QAOA variants for solution quality, runtime or noise strength quantum training, the use of QAOA (and possibly other classes

of algorithms) could be enabled by allowing users to specify [23] C. Xue *et al.*, *Effects of quantum noise on quantum approximate optimization algorithm*, *Chinese Physics Letters*, vol. 38, 2021. relevant non-functional requirements (*e.g.*, acceptable solution [24] J. Marshall *et al.*, *Characterizing local noise in QAOA circuits*, *IOP* quality or communication latency) in quantum code [51–53], *SciNotes*, vol. 1, no. 2, 2020. for instance via meta-annotations. If augmented with appropri- [25] T. S. Humble *et al.*, *Quantum computers for high-performance computing*, *IEEE Micro*, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 15–23, 2021. ate (and already available [54]) means of providing objective [26] Y. Alexeev *et al.*, *Quantum-centric supercomputing for materials* functions decoupled from quantum specifics, yet convertible *science: A perspective on challenges and future directions*, *Future* to QUBO, and together with apt classical means of providing *Generation Computer Systems*, vol. 160, pp. 666–710, 2024. [27] P. J. Karalekas *et al.*, *A quantum-classical cloud platform optimized* initial solution estimates, this would allow a compiler or *for variational hybrid algorithms*, *Q. Sci. & Tech.*, vol. 5, no. 2, 2020. runtime system to select the most suitable algorithm. Our [28] M. Bandic, S. Feld, and C. G. Almudever, *Full-stack quantum* results suggest that this vision is achievable in the near future. *computing systems in the NISQ era: Algorithm-driven and hardware- aware compilation techniques*, in *Proc. DAAD*, 2022, pp. 1–6. **Acknowledgements:** This work was supported by the German Federal [29] M. N. Farooqi and M. Ruefenacht, *Exploring hybrid classical-* Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF), within the funding program *quantum compute systems through simulation*, in *IEEE QCE*, vol. 02, “quantum technologies—–from basic research to market”, grant numbers 2023, pp. 127–133. 13NI6092 (WM, ST) and 13N16093 (HS). WM and ST acknowledge support [30] A. Elsharkawy *et al.*, *Integration of Quantum Accelerators with High* by the High-Tech Agenda of the Free State of Bavaria. *Performance Computing – A Review of Quantum Programming Tools*,
1. [31]

REFERENCES C. Campbell *et al.*, *Superstaq: Deep optimization of quantum pro- grams*, in *IEEE QCE*, 2023, pp. 1020–1032. [1] J. Preskill, *Quantum computing in the NISQ era and beyond*, *Quan-* [32] T. Hoefler and R. Belli, *Scientific benchmarking of parallel computing tum*, vol. 2, p. 79, 2018. *systems: Twelve ways to tell the masses when reporting performance* [2] J. Roffe, *Quantum error correction: An introductory guide*, *Contem- results*, in *Proc. Int. Conf. for HPC, Networking, Storage and Anal- porary Physics*, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 226–245, 2019. *ysis*, ACM, 2015. [3] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, *A quantum approximate* [33] K. Wintersperger, H. Safi, and W. Mauerer, *QPU-System Co-design optimization algorithm*, 2014. arXiv: 1411.4028 [quant-ph]. *for Quantum HPC Accelerators*, in *Proc. ARCS*, 2022, pp. 100–114. [4] D. J. Egger, J. Mareˇcek, and S. Woerner, *Warm-starting quantum* [34] H. Safi, K. Wintersperger, and W. Mauerer, *Influence of hw-sw- optimization*, *Quantum*, vol. 5, p. 479, 2021. *co-design on quantum computing scalability*, in *IEEE International* [5] S. Bravyi *et al.*, *Obstacles to variational quantum optimization from Conference on Quantum Software*, 2023, pp. 104–115. *symmetry protection*, *Phys. Rev. Lett.*, vol. 125, 2020. [35] P. Virtanen *et al.*, *SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific* [6] E. Bae and S. Lee, *Recursive QAOA outperforms the original QAOA Computing in Python*, *Nature Methods*, vol. 17, pp. 261–272, 2020. *for the MAX-CUT problem on complete graphs*, *Quantum Information* [36] M. J. D. Powell, *A Direct Search Optimization Method That Models Processing*, vol. 23, no. 3, p. 78, 2024. *the Objective and Constraint Functions by Linear Interpolation*, in [7] O. H. Ibarra and C. E. Kim, *Fast approximation algorithms for the Advances in Optimization and Numerical Analysis*, Springer, 1994. *knapsack and sum of subset problems*, *J. ACM*, vol. 22, no. 4, 1975. [37] R. L. Graham, *Bounds for certain multiprocessing anomalies*, *The* [8] M. X. Goemans and D. P. Williamson, *Improved approximation algo- Bell System Technical Journal*, vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 1563–1581, 1966. *rithms for maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite* [38] T. H. Cormen *et al.*, *Introduction to algorithms*, Fourth edition. *programming*, *J. ACM*, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1115–1145, 1995. Cambridge, Massachusett: The MIT Press, 2022. [9] G. Karakostas, *A better approximation ratio for the vertex cover* [39] C. Blank *et al.*, *Quantum classifier with tailored quantum kernel*, *npj problem*, *ACM Trans. Algorithms*, vol. 5, no. 4, 2009. *Quantum Information*, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 41, 2020. A. Lucas, *Ising formulations of many NP problems*, *Frontiers in* [10] [40] T. Weber *et al.*, *Construction and volumetric benchmarking of quan- Physics*, vol. 2, 2014. *tum computing noise models*, *Physica Scripta*, vol. 99, no. 6, 2024. A. Awasthi *et al.*, *Quantum computing techniques for multi-knapsack* [11] [41] M. A. Nielsen and I. L. Chuang, *Quantum Computation and Quantum problems*, in *Intelligent Computing*, Springer Nature, 2023. *Information*. Cambridge University Press, 2010. [12] Z. Jiang, E. G. Rieffel, and Z. Wang, *Near-optimal quantum circuit* [42] P. Krantz *et al.*, *A quantum engineer’s guide to superconducting for grover’s unstructured search using a transverse field*, *Phys. Rev. qubits*, *Applied Physics Reviews*, vol. 6, no. 2, 2019. *A*, vol. 95, 6 2017. [43] W. Mauerer and S. Scherzinger, *1-2-3 reproducibility for quantum* [13] Z. Wang *et al.*, *XY Mixers: Analytical and numerical results for the software experiments*, *IEEE SANER*, pp. 1247–1248, 2022. *quantum alternating operator ansatz*, *Phys. Rev. A*, vol. 101, 1 2020. [44] M. A. Nielsen, *A simple formula for the average gate fidelity of a* [14] A. B¨artschi and S. Eidenbenz, *Grover Mixers for QAOA: Shifting quantum dynamical operation*, *Physics Letters A*, vol. 303, 2002. *complexity from mixer design to state preparation*, in *Proc. IEEE* D. C. McKay *et al.*, *Efficient Z-Gates for Quantum Computing*, [45] *QCE*, 2020, pp. 72–82. *Physical Review A*, vol. 96, no. 2, 2017. [15] L. Zhu *et al.*, *Adaptive quantum approximate optimization algorithm* J. Misra and D. Gries, *A constructive proof of vizing’s theorem*, [46] *for solving combinatorial problems on a quantum computer*, *Phys. Information Processing Letters*, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 131–133, 1992. *Rev. Res.*, vol. 4, 2022. [47] E. Magesan, *Depolarizing behavior of quantum channels in higher* [16] R. Tate *et al.*, *Warm-Started QAOA with Custom Mixers Provably dimensions*, *Quantum Info. Comput.*, vol. 11, no. 5, 2011. *Converges and Computationally Beats Goemans-Williamson’s Max-* [48] C. C. McGeoch and P. Farr´e, *Milestones on the quantum utility Cut at Low Circuit Depths*, *Quantum*, vol. 7, p. 1121, 2023. *highway: Quantum annealing case study*, *ACM TQC*, vol. 5, 2023. [17] V. Vijendran *et al.*, *An expressive ansatz for low-depth quantum* [49] T. Kr¨uger and W. Mauerer, *Quantum annealing-based software com- approximate optimisation*, *Quantum Sci. and Tech.*, vol. 9, 2024. *ponents: An experimental case study with sat solving*, in *Proc. ICSEW*, [18] J. Sud *et al.*, *Parameter-setting heuristic for the quantum alternating* New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2020, pp. 445–450. *operator ansatz*, *Phys. Rev. Res.*, vol. 6, 2024. [50] S. Zielinski *et al.*, *SATQUBOLIB: A python framework for creating* [19] J. A. Montanez-Barrera, D. Willsch, and K. Michielsen, *Transfer and benchmarking (Max-)3SAT QUBOs*, in *Proc. I4CS*, Springer, *learning of optimal qaoa parameters in combinatorial optimization*, 2024, pp. 48–66.
1. eprint: 2402.05549.

[51] M. Sch¨onberger *et al.*, *Peel | pile? cross-framework portability of* [20] M. Streif and M. Leib, *Training the quantum approximate optimiza- quantum software*, in *IEEE ICSA-C*, 2022, pp. 164–169. *tion algorithm without access to a quantum processing unit*, *Quantum* [52] W. Mauerer, *Semantics and simulation of communication in quantum Science and Technology*, vol. 5, 2020. *programming*, *arXiv preprint quant-ph/0511145*, 2005. [21] K. Georgopoulos, C. Emary, and P. Zuliani, *Modeling and simulating* [53] J. Lee *et al.*, *Quantum task offloading with the openmp api*, in *SC23*, *the noisy behavior of near-term quantum computers*, *PRA*, 2021.
1. [54]

[22] F. Greiwe, T. Kr¨uger, and W. Mauerer, *Effects of imperfections on* E. Lobe, *Quark: Quantum application reformulation kernel*, in *IN- quantum algorithms: A software engineering perspective*, in *Proc. FORMATIK 2023*, Bonn: GI e.V., 2023, pp. 1115–1120. *IEEE International Conference on Quantum Software*, 2023.
