# warm starting quantum optimization

## Warm-starting quantum optimization

##### Daniel J. Egger1, Jakub Mareček2, and Stefan Woerner1

1IBM Quantum, IBM Research – Zurich, Säumerstrasse 4, 8803 Rüschlikon, Switzerland 2Czech Technical University, Karlovo nam. 13, Prague 2, the Czech Republic ground state is the optimum solution. The QAOA **There is an increasing interest in quantum** ﬁrst creates an initial state which is the ground state **algorithms for problems of integer program-** of a mixer Hamiltonian ˆ*HM*. A common choice of **ming and combinatorial optimization. Clas-** ˆ*HM* and initial state is *−*P*n−*1 *i*=0 ˆ*Xi* and *|*+*⟩⊗n*, respec- **sical solvers for such problems employ relax-** tively. Next, in a QAOA with depth *p*, a quantum **ations, which replace binary variables with** circuit applies exp (*−iβk* ˆ*HM*) exp (*−iγk* ˆ*HC*) at each **continuous ones, for instance in the form** layer *k* = 1*, ..., p* to create a trial state *|ψ*(***β****,* ***γ***)*⟩*. A **of higher-dimensional matrix-valued problems**

### arXiv:2009.10095v4  [quant-ph]  16 Jun 2021

classical optimizer seeks the optimal values of ***β*** and **(semideﬁnite programming). Under the *γ*** to create a trial state which minimizes the energy **Unique Games Conjecture, these relaxations** of the Hamiltonian ˆ*HC*. This algorithm has lacked **often provide the best performance ratios** theoretical guarantees on its performance ratio and **available classically in polynomial time. Here,** for certain problem instances of MAXCUT it can- **we discuss how to warm-start quantum op-** not, with constant depth, outperform the classical **timization with an initial state correspond-** Goemans-Williamson randomized rounding approxi- **ing to the solution of a relaxation of a com-** mation [24, 25]. **binatorial optimization problem and how to analyze properties of the associated quantum** Recent work has improved the original QAOA, for **algorithms. In particular, this allows the** instance, by aggregating only the best sampled can- **quantum algorithm to inherit the performance** didate solutions [15] and carefully choosing the mixer **guarantees of the classical algorithm. We il-** operator to improve convergence [26–29], empirically. **lustrate this in the context of portfolio op-** Reinforcement learning [30, 31], multi-start meth- **timization, where our results indicate that** ods [32], and local optimization [33] help navigate **warm-starting the Quantum Approximate Op-** the QAOA optimization landscape. Algorithms such **timization Algorithm (QAOA) is particularly** as the Hamiltonian Variational Ansatz produce opti- **beneﬁcial at low depth. Likewise, Recursive** mization landscapes that are easier to navigate [34]. **QAOA for MAXCUT problems shows a sys-** Furthermore, optimal ***β*** and ***γ*** values concentrate on **tematic increase in the size of the obtained** all typical instances generated by some reasonable **cut for fully connected graphs with random** distributions which may allow optimization strategies **weights, when Goemans-Williamson random-** with fewer calls to the quantum computer [35]. Cer- **ized rounding is utilized in a warm start. It** tain local classical algorithms match the performance **is straightforward to apply the same ideas to** of QAOA for Ising-like cost functions with multi-spin **other randomized-rounding schemes and opti-** interactions [36] which has motivated the development **mization problems.** of Recursive-QAOA (RQAOA) [24, 37]. RQAOA it- eratively reduces the problem size and outperforms QAOA on certain forms of Ising Hamiltonians [24].

#### 1

#### Introduction

Implementing QAOA on noisy quantum hardware is challenging as the number of gates can be high for cur- Gate-based quantum computers are expected to help rent gate ﬁdelities [38, 39]. The circuits become espe- solve problems in quantum chemistry [1–3], machine cially deep when large *p* is required or when the native learning [4, 5], ﬁnancial simulation [6–13] and com- hardware connectivity does not match the problem binatorial optimization [14, 15]. The quantum ap- structure, thence requiring SWAP gates [40]. There- proximate optimization algorithm (QAOA) [16–18], fore, in the near term, quantum computers will most inspired by a Trotterization of adiabatic quantum likely only run low-depth QAOA. Low-depth QAOA computing [19–21], runs on gate-based quantum com- results are improved by robust control [41] and by puters [22, 23]. This algorithm encodes a combinato- mapping ***β*** and ***γ*** to parameters of the control pulses rial optimization problem in a Hamiltonian ˆ*HC* whose [42, 43], a method available to cloud-based quantum computers [44] with pulse-level control [45, 46]. Daniel J. Egger: deg@zurich.ibm.com Jakub Mareček: jakub.marecek@fel.cvut.cz Recently, there has been substantial progress [47] in Stefan Woerner: wor@zurich.ibm.com the study of continuous relaxations of NP-Hard com- Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 1

binatorial optimization problems. The best-known context. Considering that any mixed-integer linear continuous relaxations of MAXCUT and many other program can be encoded in a QUBO [60], QUBO is problems take the form of semideﬁnite programs [48]. NP-Hard. Indeed, even checking local optimality is These can be solved eﬃciently both in theoretical NP-Hard [61], and hence only very special cases [62, models of computation [49], where a real-number 63] can be solved in polynomial time. arithmetic operation can be performed in unit time, If Σ is positive semideﬁnite, the trivial continuous and in practice*1* [51]. Subsequently, the solution of relaxation of QUBO a continuous relaxation of a combinatorial optimiza- *x∈*[0*,*1]*n xT* Σ*x,* tion problem is transformed into a good solution of the min (QP) discrete-valued problem by randomized rounding [52]. For instance, the celebrated Goemans-Williamson is a convex quadratic program and the optimal solu- (GW) random hyperplane rounding [53, 54] for MAX- tion *c∗*of the continuous relaxation is easily obtain- CUT ﬁnds cuts whose expected value is an *α* fraction able with classical optimizers [64]. of the global optimum, for 0*.*87856 *< α <* 0*.*87857, If Σ is not positive semideﬁnite, one can apply the with the expectation over the randomization in the well-known recipe [65] to obtain another continuous- rounding procedure. The Unique Games Conjec- valued relaxation, known as semideﬁnite program- ture [55–57], introduced in Appendix A, suggests ming (SDP): that GW randomized rounding has the best possible polynomial-time performance on MAXCUT. *Y ∈*S*n* tr(Σ*Y* ) max (SDP) Our work is motivated by the desire to provide at diag(*Y* ) = *e* least as good guarantees for QAOA as there are for classical approximations. For example, we show that *Y ⪰*0*,* for MAXCUT a warm-start can preserve the GW ap- where S*n×n* denotes the set of *n × n* symmetric ma- proximation ratio at any depth *p* [58]. Further, if trices, *e* is an *n*-vector of ones, and *Y ⪰*0 denotes the Unique Games Conjecture were to be false even that *Y* must be positive semideﬁnite. Given the op- stronger guarantees may be available, improving upon timal solution *Y ∗*to (SDP), there exist several ap- those for randomized rounding. In simulations, our proaches to generating solutions of the correspond- variant of QAOA consistently performs as well as the ing (QUBO), often with approximation guarantees, GW algorithm or better. as discussed later in this section and Appendix B. We discuss how to warm-start quantum opti- A classical laptop can solve instances of (SDP) re- mization in Sec. 2.2. We explore warm-starting laxations of QUBO, where Σ has 1013 entries [51]. QAOA (WS-QAOA) numerically in Sec. 3 by relaxing Furthermore, quantum computers oﬀer the prospect Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization prob- of some speed-ups in solving SDPs [66, 67], although lems to continuous ones which provide QAOA with recent quantum-inspired algorithms for SDPs may re- a good initial solution. In Sec. 4 we use the GW al- duce the potential speedup [68]. gorithm [53] to warm-start RQAOA. We discuss our results and conclude in Sec. 5.

##### 2.2

##### Continuous warm-start QAOA

#### 2

#### Warm-start Quantum Optimization

The solutions of either continuous-valued relaxation (QP or SDP) can be used to initialize quantum-

##### 2.1

##### Preliminaries

classical hybrid algorithms, which is known as warm- starting them [69]. In particular, we focus on warm- Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization starting QAOA. (QUBO) has been studied in Combinatorial Opti- In QAOA, each decision variable *xi* of the discrete mization since the 1960s [59]. A common formulation optimization problem corresponds to a qubit by the is relation *xi* = (1 *−zi*)*/*2. Each *zi* is replaced by a spin operator ˆ*Zi* to transform the cost function to a cost *x∈{*0*,*1*}n xT* Σ*x* + *µT x,* min (QUBO) Hamiltonian ˆ*HC* [70, 71]. Note that the ﬁnal mea- surement in QAOA can be considered as a random- where *x* is a vector of *n* binary decision variables, ized rounding. In the simplest variant of WS-QAOA, Σ *∈*R*n×n* a symmetric matrix, and *µ ∈*R*n* a vector. we replace the initial equal superposition state *|*+*⟩⊗n* Since for binary variables *x*2 *i* = *xi*, *µ* can be added with a state to the diagonal of Σ, and in the following, we only add *µ* when it simpliﬁes the notation in the given *n−*1 *|φ∗⟩*= O ˆ*RY* (*θi*) *|*0*⟩n ,* (1) *1*Notice that the analysis of [50] shows the situation is less *i*=0 trivial in the Turing machine and one may need to consider the which corresponds to the solution *c∗*of the relaxed dimension or the number of constraints a constant, as it often Problem (QP). Here, ˆ*RY* (*θi*) is a rotation around the is for a particular relaxation. Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 2

*p |*0*⟩*

|  | Rˆ Y (θ1) |  | e−iγk Hˆ C |  | Rˆ Y (−θ1) |  | Rˆ Z(−2βk) |  | Rˆ Y (θ1) |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | Rˆ Y (θN) |  |  |  | Rˆ Y (−θN) |  | Rˆ Z(−2βk) |  | Rˆ Y (θN) |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

*θi* Figure 2: Quantum circuit for WS-QAOA. The ﬁrst ˆ*RY* ro- tations prepare the initial state *|φ∗⟩*. The mixer operator, i.e. ˆ*RY* (*θi*) ˆ*RZ*(*−*2*βk*) ˆ*RY* (*−θi*), is applied after the time-evolved problem Hamiltonian ˆ*HC*. *Y X* To mitigate this eﬀect, we introduce a variant of WS-QAOA that utilizes a regularization parameter *ε ∈*[0*,* 0*.*5] and changes the rotation angle creating *|*1*⟩* the initial state according to Figure 1: Intial state ˆ*RY* (*θi*) *|*0*⟩*(red point) on the Bloch p *c∗ θi* = 2 arcsin *c∗* if *i ∈*[*ε,* 1 *−ε*]*, i* sphere. The dashed blue line from *|*0*⟩*to *|*1*⟩*is the interval *√ε* [0*,* 1]. The red line is the solution *c∗ i* to the relaxed problem. if *c∗ θi* = 2 arcsin *i ≤ε, √* The regularization parameter *ε* restricts the range of allowed if *c∗ θi* = 2 arcsin 1 *−ε i ≥*1 *−ε.* rotation angles. The orange path shows the evolution of the quantum state starting at *|*0*⟩*for *c∗ i* = 0, *ε* = 0*.*25 and The mixer Hamiltonian is adjusted accordingly. The *β* = *π/*2 with the rotations ˆ*RY* (*−θi*) ˆ*RZ*(*−*2*β*) ˆ*RY* (2*θi*). parameter *ε* provides a continuous mapping between WS-QAOA and standard QAOA since at *ε* = 0*.*5 the Y-axis of qubit *i* with angle *θi* = 2 arcsin p *c∗* and initial state is the equal superposition state and the *i c∗ i ∈*[0*,* 1] is the *i*-th coordinate of the optimum of the mixer Hamiltonian is the *X* operator. If all *c∗ i ∈*(0*,* 1) continuous-valued relaxation (QP). The probability or *ε >* 0, WS-QAOA converges to the optimal solu- to measure *|*1*⟩*in qubit *i* is thus *c∗ i* , see the geometric tion of (QUBO) as the depth *p* approaches inﬁnity representation in Fig. 1. as does standard QAOA [16]. This directly follows ˆ*HM* We also replace the mixer Hamiltonian = from the adiabatic theorem and the fact that we start *−*P*n−*1 *i*=0 ˆ*Xi* with ˆ*H*(*ws*) = P*n−*1 *i*=0 ˆ*H*(*ws*) *M,i* where in the ground state of the mixer which overlaps with *M* all computational basis states including the optimal 2*c∗* p *c∗ i* (1 *−c∗ i −*1 *−*2 *i* ) solution. For large enough *p*, (WS-)QAOA therefore ˆ*H*(*ws*) *M,i* = (2) *−*2 p *c∗ i* (1 *−c∗ i* ) 1 *−*2*c∗* reproduces the adiabatic evolution transforming the *i* ground state of the mixer into the ground state of and has ˆ*RY* (*θi*) *|*0*⟩*as ground state with eigenvalue ˆ*HC*. The speed of the adiabatic evolution is limited of *−*1. The ground state of ˆ*H*(*ws*) is thus *|φ∗⟩* by the spectral gap of the intermediate Hamiltoni- *M* with eigenvalue *−n* [16]. Therefore, WS-QAOA ap- ans. If the evolution is too fast transitions to excited plies at layer *k* a mixing gate which is given by the states occur which may not result in the optimal so- time-evolved mixing Hamiltonian exp(*−iβk* ˆ*H*(*ws*) ), lution. The speed of the evolution can be related to *M* see Fig. 2. Since ˆ*H*(*ws*) *p*, where a slow evolution, i.e., longer total evolution *M,i* = *−*sin(*θi*) ˆ*X −*cos(*θi*) ˆ*Z* the time, implies a larger *p*. The idea of (WS-)QAOA is to time-evolved mixing Hamiltonian is a rotation around speed-up this evolution by optimizing the parameters the axis*⃗n* = [*−*sin(*θi*)*,* 0*, −*cos(*θi*)] on the Bloch- instead of following a ﬁxed annealing schedule. sphere of qubit *i* and can be implemented using the single-qubit rotations ˆ*RY* (*θi*) ˆ*RZ*(*−*2*β*) ˆ*RY* (*−θi*). If a coordinate in the optimal solution of a continu-

##### 2.3

##### Rounded warm-start QAOA

ous relaxation is *c∗ i* = 0 or *c∗ i* = 1, qubit *i* would be ini- tialized in state *|*0*⟩*or *|*1*⟩*, respectively. In such cases, Further variants of WS-QAOA randomly round the the qubit will remain in its initial state throughout optimum of the continuous-valued relaxation before the QAOA optimization when ˆ*HC* contains only ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj* using it as the initial state. This is appealing to and identity spin-operators. This creates a reacha- quantum hardware with limited qubit numbers as bility issue when the optimal continuous and discrete even for convex relaxations in dimensions that scale solutions do not overlap, i.e., *d∗ i* = 1 and *c∗ i* = 0 or super-linearly with the number *n* of binary variables *d∗ i* = 0 and *c∗ i* = 1, where *d∗*is the solution to the in (QUBO), such as (SDP) with dimension *n*(*n*+1)*/*2, (QUBO). the representation of the rounded solution to (QUBO) Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 3

Table 1: An overview of design choices in warm-starting a quantum optimization algorithm for (QUBO). Under “What to round?”, columns are ordered left to right to suggest the increasing strength of the relaxations, although this is necessarily fraught in the case of hierarchies of relaxations [72–74], where one column represents a potentially inﬁnite number of relaxations. Similarly, under “How to round?”, we order the options approximately by their performance.

| Variant | What to round? | When to round? | How to round? |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | (QP) Relaxation SOCP Relaxations [74] (SDP) Relaxation [53, 65, 75] Entropy-penalized SDP [76] Sparse Moment SDP [73] Moment SDP [72] | Classical pre-processing Quantum circuit (QC) | 0.5-Approximation [77, 78] Random hyperplane [53, 75] Iterative [79, 80] Iterative [81] Measurement in a QC |
| WS-QAOA WS-RQAOA |  |  |  |

requires only *O*(*n*) qubits. Two notable examples gorithm to the global optimum with increasing depth are the random-hyperplane rounding of SDP relax- *p*. We will analyze this numerically in Sec. 4. ations for MAXCUT [53], see Appendix B, and iter- ative rounding of SDP relaxations for a wider variety of problems, see Appendix D. Both of these exam- Notice that measuring an initial state provided by ples provide initial states that already have the best a randomized rounding of the semideﬁnite program- approximation guarantee available classically in poly- ming relaxation (SDP) yields the best approximation nomial time. guarantees available classically in polynomial time un- We now elaborate on the example of Goemans- der the Unique Games Conjecture [55–57]. There- Williamson random-hyperplane rounding of (SDP). fore, any quantum circuit that preserves or improves For a given GW cut we generate an initial state us- the performance ratio would preserve or improve the ing *Y* -rotations with a *ε ∈*(0*,* 0*.*5), as discussed in overall performance guarantees. Sec. 2.2. To warm-start QAOA such that we can re- tain the GW bound on MAXCUT, we wish create a quantum circuit that can both represent solutions of Rounding in the classical pre-processing readily the random-hyperplane rounding as well as deviate leads to the warm-started recursive QAOA (WS- from them. We therefore modify the mixer such that its time-evolution is ˆ*RY* (*−θi*) ˆ*RZ*(*−*2*β*) ˆ*RY* (*θi*) instead RQAOA), illustrated in Fig. 3 and demonstrated in of ˆ*RY* (*θi*) ˆ*RZ*(*−*2*β*) ˆ*RY* (*−θi*), i.e., we multiply the oﬀ- Sec. 4. For MAXCUT of a graph *Gn*, we leverage a GW pre-solver *GW*(*Gn, N, M*) to generate *N* good diagonal elements in (2) by *−*1. With this modiﬁca- cuts of which we retain the *M < N* best unique cuts. tion, the value of the regularization parameter *ε* can These *M* cuts therefore initialize *M* WS-QAOA opti- be set to 0*.*25 to generate states that diﬀer from the mizers with *ε ∈*(0*,* 0*.*5). Each QAOA solver produces GW rounding as well as retain it by choosing *β*1 = *π/*2 an optimized variational state *|ψ∗⟩l* = P2*n−*1 and *γ*1 = 0. At these values the depth-one variational *αil |i⟩ i*=0 form reduces to for *l* = 1*, ..., M*. We then aggregate these *M* varia- tional states by averaging the probability of sampling ˆ*RY* (*−θi*) ˆ*RZ*(*−π*) ˆ*RY* (2*θi*) *|*0*⟩,* (3) each bit-string *|i⟩*, i.e. ¯*pi* = *M −*1 P*M l*=1 *|αil|*2, and use these average probabilities to create the correla- for each qubit, and creates the states *−i |*1*⟩*and *−i |*0*⟩* tion matrix *M* needed by RQAOA [24, 37], see Ap- when *c∗ i* = *ε* and 1 *−ε*, respectively. Thus, the vari- pendix E and F. At each iteration, RQAOA removes ational form can recover the solution given by the one decision variable *zi* from the problem by replacing GW rounding, considering that *z* and 1 *−z* repre- it with sign(*Mij*)*zj*, where (*i, j*) = arg max(*i,j*) *|Mij|*. sent the same cut, see the orange path in Fig. 1 as This generates a new MAXCUT problem with a new example. Therefore, WS-QAOA is at least as good graph *Gn−*1, see Appendix G, for which we repeat as GW rounding. This adjustment also comes with a this procedure, illustrated in Fig. 3, until the reduced drawback. Since the prepared initial state is no longer graph reaches a certain size *n*stop. The graph *Gn*stop an eigenstate of the mixer (otherwise we would not be is solved by diagonalizing the Hamiltonian ˆ*HC* or by able to deviate from it) we cannot use the same argu- ments as in [16] to derive the convergence of the al- applying classical optimizers. Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 4

Recursive warm-start MAXCUT for *Gn* assigning a value uniformly at random achieves a 0.5 approximation ratio [77] and can be derandom- Pre-solver *GW*(*Gn, N, M*) generates cuts *{c*1*, ..., cM}* ized [78, Chapter 6]. The random-hyperplane round- ing of GW [53], as explained in Appendix B, im- *c*1 *cl cM* proves the performance ratio on MAXCUT to *α* = *... ...* WS-QAOA(*c*1*, ε*) WS-QAOA(*cl, ε*) WS-QAOA(*cM, ε*) *π* min0*≤θ≤π* 2 1*−*cos *θ ≈*0*.*878. The same ratio can also *θ |ψ∗⟩*1 *|ψ∗⟩l |ψ∗⟩M* Solve *Gn−*1 be obtained with an iterative procedure that rounds coordinates that are close to being integral to integers Aggregator [79, 80] and removes them from further processing*2*, *{*¯*pi}* as explained in Appendix D. Plausibly, the same ra- Compute *M* & replace *zi* = sign(*Mij*)*zj* tio could also be achieved with a number of novel and to obtain a new graph *Gn−*1 very diﬀerent iterative procedures, such as [81]. *n −*1 *< n*stop? No Yes

##### 2.5

##### Discussion of warm-starting quantum op-

End RQAOA, replacements e.g. *{z*1 : (*z*4*, −*1)*, z*2 : (*z*3*,* 1)*, ...}*

##### timization

On noisy quantum hardware it seems appealing to Figure 3: WS-RQAOA for MAXCUT. At each iteration we use the WS-RQAOA with the strongest available re- run several WS-QAOAs that are initialized with diﬀerent so- lutions from the GW randomized rounding. The resulting laxations [72–74] in the classical pre-processing. How- samples are aggregated to compute the combined correla- ever, higher-order relaxations within these hierarchies tion matrix *M* needed by RQAOA to eliminate a decision [72–74] require a run-time of the classical SDP solver variable. which is super-polynomial in the number *n* of integral decision variables in (QUBO) and the order in the hi- erarchy [72–74]. Therefore, we limit ourselves to the

##### 2.4

##### Further variants of warm-starting quantum

use of WS-RQAOA with the basic (SDP) relaxation,

##### optimization

whose value can be approximated classically to any ﬁxed precision in polynomial time. In Sec. 2.2 and 2.3, we gave ﬁrst examples of how to In contrast, one could extend the use of the warm-start QAOA using a continuous relaxation and continuous-valued solution *c∗*of the (QP) relaxation a randomized rounding. The key algorithm-design to either the solution *Y ∗*of the basic (SDP) relax- questions in warm-starting quantum optimization are: ation, or its strengthened variants [72, 73], when what to round, when to round it, and how to round it. preparing the initial state. However, this may re- For each of these questions, there are multiple options quire more qubits than would be practical in the near- available, as suggested in the previous discussion and term. For example, a naïve approach to prepare the summarized in Tab. 1. initial state would utilize Θ(*n*2) and Ω(*n*2) qubits to First, there are many options for what to round, represent the optimum *Y ∗*of the basic (SDP) relax- outside of the (QP) relaxation and the (SDP) re- ation and its strengthened variants, respectively*3*. At laxation. For example, the (QP) relaxation can be the same time, strong performance guarantees would seen as a second-order cone programming (SOCP) re- be readily available for such variants of warm-started laxation, and could be strengthened iteratively [74], quantum optimization. For example, consider rep- until its objective-function value coincides with the resenting the matrix-valued solution of a (SDP) re- objective-function value of the non-convex (QUBO), laxation in a *O*(*n*2)-qubit initial state, applying a albeit at the cost of an exponential growth of the re- parametrized quantum circuit that allows for the iden- laxation. Similarly, one could strengthen the (SDP) tity in the unitary representation, at least for some relaxation either by using an entropy-penalizing term choice of its parameters, and then, measuring the [76] or by using the Moment/SOS hierarchy [72] and qubit register. This can be seen as a randomized- its sparse variant [73]. rounding algorithm, and one can hence analyze the Second, there are two options for when to round: quality of the measured output. either in the classical pre-processing — within the ini- A recently-proposed [79] avenue for the analysis tial state preparation which leads to the WS-RQAOA of such randomized-rounding algorithms utilizes the discussed in Sec. 2.3 on the example of the (SDP) Sticky Brownian Motion [82], a well-known concept relaxation — or within the quantum circuit. In its simplest form, the latter can be a quantum measure- *2*Notice that when the WS-QAOA leverages both a classical ment, as discussed in Sec. 2.2 on the example of the optimization routine with a classical conditional statement and (QP) relaxation. a noisy quantum computer, such a rounding procedure can also Third, there are several options for the round- be considered. ing procedure. Even the simplest rounding mecha- *3*While more elaborate representations of the matrix have nisms often perform well: on MAXCUT, for exam- been proposed [66, 67], it is not yet clear how to implement the ple, disregarding the relaxation and coordinate-wise related oracles in practice. Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 5

1 2 3 4 5 in Stochastic Analysis, possibly with a slowdown due 1.0

| 1.0 \|2 0.8 * \| * 0.6 d \| Probability 0.4 0.2 0.0 3.0 3.5 Energy 4.0 | (a) |
| --- | --- |
|  | (b) Equal superposition Warm-start Warm-start - normal mixer |
| 4.5 |  |

to the use of a speed-function [79], as explained in Appendix D. In the case of a (SDP) warm start, one can obtain approximation guarantees for rounded so- lutions that match the best guarantees available clas- sically in polynomial time, see Appendix D. A particularly important question is whether any of these variants would strictly improve upon the guar- antees of GW [53]. Under the Unique Games Conjec- ture [83, 84], it is strictly impossible to improve upon the guarantees of GW using either quantum or classi- cal algorithms unless a quantum computer can solve NP-Hard problems in polynomial time, which is not believed to be the case [85], or if P = NP. However, 1 2 3 4 5 a richer picture emerges if this conjecture were to be QAOA depth *p* false and it may be possible to improve approximation ratios using both classical and quantum algorithms. Figure 4: (a) Probability to sample the optimal state *|d∗⟩* from the optimized trial state *|ψ∗⟩*and (b) energy of *|ψ∗⟩* for warm-start and standard QAOA at diﬀerent depths for *n* = 6 assets and *q* = 2. The optimal discrete and

#### 3

#### Simulations with Continuous-Valued

continuous solutions are *d∗*= (0*,* 0*,* 1*,* 1*,* 1*,* 0) and *c∗≃*

#### Warm-start

(0*.*17*,* 0*,* 0*.*97*,* 0*.*73*,* 1*.*0*,* 0*.*14), respectively. QAOA is run ten times with diﬀerent initial random guesses for (***β****,* ***γ***) chosen As a ﬁrst computational illustration of WS-QAOA, we uniformly from *±*2*π*. The thick lines show the median of the solve combinatorial-optimization problems framed as ten runs while the shaded areas indicate the 25% and 75% quantiles. The gray dashed line shows *E*0. a ﬁnancial-portfolio optimization with a budget con- straint [15]. An optimal portfolio minimizes risk and maximizes return by exploiting imperfect correlations with WS-QAOA then standard QAOA for the sim- in a covariance matrix Σ between *n* assets with ex- ulated depths 1 *≤p ≤*5, see Fig. 4(a). Further- pected returns *µ* [86]. Selecting *B* assets out of *n* more, the quality of the solution found by WS-QAOA with equal weights thus requires solving is better than standard QAOA since *E∗* warm is closer to *E*0 than *E∗* cold, see Fig. 4(b). At depth *p ≥*4 stan- *x∈{*0*,*1*}n qxT* Σ*x −µT x* min (4) dard QAOA has enough free parameters to satisfy **1***T x* = *B,* the budget constraint, as shown by the low energy in such that (5) Fig. 4(b), but still fails to produce a trial state which contains the optimal solution with high probability. where *q* controls the risk-return trade-oﬀ. We investigate the role of the warm-start mixer op- We create random instances of this problem with erator ˆ*H*(*ws*) by replacing it with the standard mixer *n* = 6 assets by simulating the time-series of the *M −*P*n−*1 *i*=0 ˆ*Xi* while using the initial state given by the asset prices and computing the covariance matrix and returns, see Appendix H. We enforce a budget continuous solution *c∗*. Under these conditions the en- constraint *B* = 3 with a large quadratic penalty ergy of the optimized state does not converge to the term *λ*(**1***T x −B*)2 where we chose *λ* = 3 as it minimum energy, see blue triangles in Fig. 4(b). The is much larger than Σ and *µ*. Each instance is probability of sampling the optimal discrete solution mapped to an Ising Hamiltonian ˆ*HC*. To mea- is between warm-start and standard QAOA but de- sure the performance of standard and warm-start pends heavily on the initial point given to COBYLA, QAOA we compute the energy of the optimized trial see Fig. 4(a). These results further justify the use of state *⟨ψ*(***β****∗,* ***γ****∗*)*|* ˆ*HC|ψ*(***β****∗,* ***γ****∗*)*⟩*labeled as *E∗* cold and the modiﬁed mixer in WS-QAOA. *E∗* warm, respectively. We normalize *E∗* cold and *E∗* warm to To further illustrate the advantage of a warm- the minimum energy *E*0 found by diagonalizing ˆ*HC*. start at low depth we solve 250 random portfolio in- Since the state-vector simulator in Qiskit [87] evalu- stances with warm-start and standard QAOA, both ates the quantum circuits the only source of random- at depth *p* = 1. Here, the standard QAOA pro- ness is the initial guess for ***β*** and ***γ*** chosen uniformly duces variational states that poorly approximate the from *±*2*π* given to the COBYLA optimizer we use ground state, see the histogram of *E∗* cold in Fig. 5(a). to ﬁnd ***β****∗*and ***γ****∗*. The optimal solution *c∗*of the However, WS-QAOA produces optimized variational continuous relaxation of the problem used to warm- states that are much closer to the minimum energy of start QAOA is found with IBM® ILOG® CPLEX® each problem Hamiltonian. Furthermore, we ﬁnd that 12.10.0 (CPLEX). The probability of sampling the op- WS-QAOA tends to produce better solutions when the overlap *d∗T c∗/B* between the optimal solutions timal binary solution *d∗*is more than 5 times higher Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 6

|  | (a) Warm start Cold start |  |  |  |  |  |  | ing form the ground state of the mixer Hamiltonian. At time step k ∈ {0, ..., N} we apply the opera- tor exp(−iβ Hˆ M) exp(−iγ Hˆ C) where the annealing k k schedules are β = 2δt(1 − i/N) and γ = 2iδ t/N k k with δt = T/N. We compute the energy as function of T, which controls the total annealing time, and N 0.95 1.00 using the equal-superposition mixer P in =− 01 Xˆ and the i Hˆ(ws) warm-start mixer . Warm start requires less an- M nealing time T and a smaller number of steps N than the equal superposition mixer to minimize the energy, as can be seen by comparing (a) and (b) in Fig. 6. This is further confirmed by computing the energy at each time step for T = 40 and N = 60. When 9 1.0 the warm-start mixer Hˆ(ws) is used, the initial and M final energies are lower than when the equal superpo- AOA over stan- sition mixer is used. These data emphasize, from an ces with q = 2. annealing point of view, that WS-QAOA converges zed trial states faster than QAOA. warm-start nor- OBYLA seeded hosen uniformly 4 Simulations with Rounded Warm- ound by direct Start WS-QAOA with E , normalized 0 ard QAOA, i.e. Next, we discuss warm-starting QAOA for MAX- lap between the CUT. The maximum cut of an edge-weighted graph eights and con- G = (V, E) with nodes V , edges E, and weights hat WS-QAOA ω , {i, j} ∈ E is a partitioning of the set of nodes ij warm/∆ cold = 0 V in two such that the sum of the edge weights ω ij ortfolio. where i and j are in different parts is maximized. This is cast as 1.0 1 max X ω (1 −z z ) (6) energy 0.8 ij i j 2 (i,j)∈E 0.6 Normalized such that z ∈{−1, 1}\|V \|, 0.4 0.2 where the binary variable z indicates which side of i 0.0 the cut node i is on. In the case of positive edge 40 ime T weights ω , for any ϵ, the problem cannot be ap- ij proximated within the ratio of 16/17 −ϵ classically in polynomial time [88], unless P = NP. In the case of the real-valued edge-weights ω , the hardness factor ij is 11/13 − ϵ [75]. In both cases, under the Unique Games Conjecture [55–57], the best guarantees ob- tainable classically in polynomial time are those of the random-hyperplane rounding [53, 54, 75], as we detail in Appendices B and C. normalized to Since we cannot relax MAXCUT to a (QP) with nealing for the a positive semi-definite matrix, without a projection ition mixer (b). onto the cone of positive-semidefinite matrices, we ts for which the now warm-start QAOA with a binary solution ob- tained using the GW rounding. Here, the varia- tional form can only produce states different from the initial GW cut when the regularization param- closer to 1, see eter ε > 0. We study the effect of ε by minimizing the energy of depth-one WS-QAOAs applied to ten a warm-start fully connected graphs with 30 nodes and edge weights We simulate uniformly chosen from {−10, −9, ..., 0, ..., 9, 10}. For olution start- each graph we generate ten GW cuts and study the |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | 75 0. | 80 |  |  | EQ | 0.85 0.90 AOA/E0 |  |
|  | (b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | 0.7 ovement 250 ran of the e h (orang We foun itial gue he mini (b) E ution, i. ifference E , as a 0 of the p . ∆ warm nergy of -QAOA | o d n e) d s m ne e. f r / t f | f o e a \| s u r o u o ∆ h o | d de m rgy nd ψ( es m gy ∆ bta nc ble col e t un | * p p β fo e d wa in ti m d ri d | 0.8 0. T c * /B th-one WS-Q ortfolio instan of the optimi without (blue) ∗, γ∗)⟩with C r β and γ c nergy E is f 0 ifference of = E w∗ − rm arm ed with stand on of the over with binary w < 1 implies t al state and ∆ the optimal p |  |
| (a) 80 N steps 60 of 40 Number 20 20 Total an (c) energy 10 1 Normalized 10 2 Equ War 10 |  |  |  |  | N Number of steps | 80 60 40 20 | (b) |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | (a) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 20 Total anneal t |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | 40 neal time T |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | Equ | al superpo | si | ti | on | mi | xer |  |
|  |  | m-start mi 0 | xe | r |  |  | 101 Time |  |
|  |  | rgy of ( Hˆ )] C er (a) an (a) and nergy in and re ustrate t of qu Trotte | t af d ( (c la t a ri | h te t b ) x h n z | e r he ) i w ed e tu in | q T e nd a a m g | uantum state rotterized an qual superpos icate the poin s obtained. problems is dvantage of annealing. the time-ev |  |

Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 7

ﬁve best cuts with WS-QAOA. To ﬁnd the optimal *β*1 and *γ*1 we seed COBYLA with an initial point obtained as follows. We perform a grid search in *γ*1 with 25 equally spaced values from *−*2*π* to 2*π*. For each value of *γ*1 we evaluate the energy for the two points *β*1 *∈{*3*π/*4*,* 3*π/*8*}* and ﬁt the result to *a* sin(2*β*1) + *b* sin(4*β*1) to ﬁnd the *β*1 that mini- mizes the energy without having to perform a two- dimensional grid scan. The (*β*1*, γ*1) with the lowest energy is given as initial point to COBYLA. At *ε* = 0 the median energy, normalized to the energy of the maximum cut, is 0.907 and corresponds to the energy of the GW cuts used to warm-start QAOA, see Fig. 7. As *ε* increases, the normalized energy decreases. How- Figure 7: Energy, normalized to the energy of the maximum ever, around *ε* = 0*.*15 the median energy starts to in- cut, as a function of *ε* for ten graphs each solved ﬁve times crease, and for *ε* = 0*.*25 rises beyond the energy of the with diﬀerent GW cuts. The shaded area indicates the 25% GW cut to 0.929, which suggests that warm-starting to 75% quantiles and the line shows the median. Each small quantum optimization may lead to algorithms which dot is the energy from one WS-QAOA. The dotted line shows can outperform the GW randomized rounding. This the median normalized energy at *ε* = 0*.*25. increase in *ε* is not observed when the mixer from Eq. (2) is used, see Appendix I. Next, we illustrate the WS-RQAOA algorithm out- forms standard RQAOA, see Fig. 8, and that the num- lined in Sec. 2.3 at depth one by searching for the max- ber of maximum cuts found decreases with graph size. imum cut of arbitrary graphs with *n* = 20, and *n* = 30 Fully connected graphs with 30 nodes are the hard- nodes. Two types of graphs are solved, one where each est to solve among the graphs we consider. Still, for edge appears with a *pE* = 1*/*2 probability and has a the graphs in Fig. 8, we observe that the optimal *β∗* 1 1*/*2 probability of having a positive or negative unit and *γ∗* 1 are systematically found. This indicates that weight. The second type of graphs are fully connected when warm-start and standard RQAOA fail, it is be- with uniformly distributed edge weights sampled from cause the depth-one variational form is not versatile *{−*10*, −*9*, ...,* 0*, ...,* 9*,* 10*}*. We expect that ﬁnding the enough to capture the correlations in the maximum maximum cut for the fully connected graphs will be cut. At *ε* = 0*.*25 we often observed that *β∗* 1 = *π/*2 harder than those with *pE* = 1*/*2 [89] and that the and *γ∗* 1 = 0, see Fig. 9. We therefore benchmark resulting QAOA circuits will be deeper as they have WS-RQAOA against a classical recursive optimiza- more edges [90]. For each graph size and type we tion procedure, where the average correlation matrix randomly generate 100 graphs. At each iteration a of the ﬁve best GW cuts is used to eliminate decision GW pre-solver generates *N* = 10 cuts of which we variables in each iteration, similarly to RQAOA, see select the best *M* = 5 unique cuts to warm-start ﬁve black bars in Fig. 8. This classical algorithm performs QAOA solvers with a depth *p* = 1 and *ε* = 0*.*25, cho- better than standard RQAOA, but slightly worse than sen based on the results from Fig. 7. We chose a low *N* WS-RQAOA. to avoid systematically giving QAOA the maximum We now investigate WS-QAOA for *p >* 1 in a cut, see Appendix B. This only holds for the small non-recursive setting. Since the eﬃcient algorithm graphs with which we illustrate WS-RQAOA. For outlined in Appendix F is not valid for *p >* 1 larger graphs we would, however, choose a much larger we solve a small, fully connected graph with six *N* as GW cuts can be eﬃciently generated. The stan- nodes and edge weights uniformly distributed in dard and warm-start depth-one RQAOA algorithms *{−*10*, −*9*, ...,* 0*, ...,* 10*}*, see Fig. 9(a). The maximum are eﬃciently simulated by computing the correla- cut of this graph has size 27. By comparing the en- tions *⟨*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj⟩*at each iteration, see Appendix F. The ergy landscape *E*(*β*1*, γ*1) of a depth-one and depth- parameters *β*1 and *γ*1 are optimized with COBYLA three WS-QAOA initialized with the cut 001111, of which is initialized with a good initial point obtained size 23, we observe that the optimal trial state of from a grid search, as discussed above, to avoid local- deeper variational forms is no-longer the initial GW minima. When a graph reaches *n*stop = *n/*2 nodes cut, see Fig. 9(b-d). We study the probability of sam- we diagonalize the corresponding Hamiltonian to ﬁnd pling the maximum cut as a function of *p* by running the maximum cut of this reduced problem. Together 30 WS-QAOAs each with a random initial ***β*** and ***γ*** with the replacements from RQAOA we obtain an ap- chosen uniformly from [0*,* 2*π*] and *±*2*π*, respectively, proximation of the maximum cut of the original graph for depths *p* = 1*, ...,* 6. The probability to sample the with *n* nodes. We compare WS-RQAOA with stan- maximum cut for this graph increases with *p* while dard RQAOA. the energy of the optimized trial state decreases, see Our simulations indicate that WS-RQAOA outper- Fig. 10. This matches our expectations from the- Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 8

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| 100 |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |

|  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |
| 100 |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |

| 32 ( 28 24 Counts 20 16 12 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | ( | a) |  | Best GW cut out of 10 |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | Standard RQAOA Warm-start RQAOA |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | Recursive classical GW |  | Recursive classical GW |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

100

| 0 32 ( counts 28 24 Counts 20 16 cut 12 Max. 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | ( | c) |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

100 Max. cut counts 75 75 50 50 25 25 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 Cut size (% of maximum cut) Cut size (% of maximum cut)

| 32 ( 28 24 Counts 20 16 12 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | ( | b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

100

| 0 32 ( counts 28 24 Counts 20 16 cut 12 Max. 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | ( | d) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

100 Max. cut counts 75 75 50 50 25 25 0 0 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100 Cut size (% of maximum cut) Cut size (% of maximum cut) Figure 8: Histograms of cut sizes, relative to the maximum cut found by CPLEX, for the best out of ten cuts generated by GW on the initial graph (blue), standard RQAOA (orange), WS-RQAOA (red), and the recursive classical solver based on GW (black). (a) and (b) correspond to random graphs with 20 and 30 nodes, respectively, *pE* = 1*/*2 and edge weights in *{−*1*,* 1*}*. (c) and (d) correspond to fully-connected graphs with 20 and 30 nodes, respectively, with edge weights uniformly distributed in *{−*10*, −*9*, ...,* 0*, ...,* 10*}*. The number of maximum cuts found is shown in the gray shaded sub-plots and not the main plot. The dashed line shows the hardness factor 11*/*13. of the energy landscape, even for this six-node graph, 4 may therefore explain why the energy of the optimized 3 3 trial state decreases slowly with *p*. 4 3 -7 4 6 -8 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 6 9 Prob. Maximum cut (%) -7 1 (a) 40 -5 20 0 5 (b) Energy 10 Initial cut 001111 energy 15 Maximum cut energy Figure 9: (a) The graph used to study the energy-landscape 1 2 3 4 5 6 QAOA depth *p* as a function of *β*1 and *γ*1 for depth-one (b) and depth-three (c) WS-QAOA. The initial cut is 001111 and *ε* = 0*.*25. Edge Figure 10: (a) Probability of sampling the maximum cut of and node colors indicate the edge weight and maximum cut the six-node graph shown in Fig. 9(a) from the optimized with value 27, respectively. (d) Ten highest probability cuts in trial state and (b) its energy as a function of QAOA depth *p*. the optimized depth-three trial state. The numbers indicate The shaded areas indicate the 25% and 75% quantiles of 30 the cut-size. In (c) the values of *βi* and *γi* for *i* = 2*,* 3 are runs represented as small dots. Their medians are the large given by COBYLA after minimizing the energy *E*(***β****,* ***γ***) and dots. The green triangle is the energy of the depth-one trial correspond to the best point in Fig. 10. The inset in (d) is state with *β*1 = *π/*2 and *γ*1 = 0. a zoom of (c) around the optimal point (orange dot) found by COBYLA.

#### 5

#### Discussion and Conclusion

ory since the circuit at depth *p* + 1 can reproduce all states of the depth *p* variational form while be- We hope to have contributed towards a framework ing more ﬂexible. Since the energy landscape is non- for the design of quantum optimization algorithms convex and contains many local minima it is chal- with a warm start, and towards reasoning about their lenging to ﬁnd globally optimal parameters starting properties. Currently, these algorithms can achieve from random guesses of ***β*** and ***γ*** [32, 91–93]. Even at the same guarantees as the classical relaxations upon depth-one with random initial guesses for *β*1 and *γ*1 which they are based. If the Unique Games Con- COBYLA does not always ﬁnd the optimal *β*1 = *π/*2 jecture is true, these guarantees cannot be improved and *γ*1 = 0, see Fig. 9 and Fig. 10(b). The complexity upon by classical or quantum algorithms running in Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 9

#### Acknowledgements

polynomial time, unless we can solve NP-Hard prob- lems in polynomial time. However, if this conjecture is The authors acknowledge useful discussions with Li- false then both quantum and classical algorithms may bor Caha, Donny Greenberg, Sergey Bravyi and be able to improve the existing performance guaran- Giacomo Nannicini. IBM, the IBM logo, and tees. ibm.com are trademarks of International Business An implementation of WS-QAOA is available in Machines Corp., registered in many jurisdictions Qiskit [94], the open-source software development kit worldwide. Other product and service names for working with quantum computers. Our simu- might be trademarks of IBM or other companies. lations show that warm-starting quantum heuristics The current list of IBM trademarks is available provides an advantage at low depth. This is partic- at https://www.ibm.com/legal/copytrade. Jakub ularly important for dense optimization problems in- Mareček’s research has been supported by the OP tended to be solved on noisy quantum hardware that RDE project CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/16_019/0000765 struggles to implement deep quantum circuits. The Research Center for Informatics. One month after portfolio optimization simulations indicate that WS- releasing our work Ref. [96] appeared on the arXiv. QAOA ﬁnds better solutions than standard QAOA. Here, future work could investigate tying budget con- straints into the quantum circuit of WS-QAOA [95].

#### A

#### The Unique Games Conjecture

We have also demonstrated how to continuously We now summarize the Unique Games Conjecture transform WS-QAOA to conventional QAOA using (UGC) without presenting any original material. In- the regularization parameter *ε*. We also showed how approximability results suggest that ﬁnding an ap- to improve QAOA for MAXCUT using the GW algo- proximate solution of a certain problem-dependent rithm to warm-start RQAOA, albeit by introducing approximation ratio is no easier than ﬁnding the op- an inconsistency between the mixer and the initial timal solution. The PCP theorem [99–101] shows state. By using a grid scan at depth one, we mitigated that in a constraint satisfaction problem, the frac- the eﬀect of local optima. We applied WS-RQAOA at tion of satisﬁable constraints is NP-Hard to approxi- depths *p >* 1 on a single graph. The results suggest mate within *some* constant factor. In particular, for that the algorithm provides better solutions as *p* in- a constraint satisfaction problem with at most *k* vari- creases. Future work may extend these simulations to ables per constraint, it suggests there is a constant more graphs with diﬀerent sizes. Further work could 0 *< α <* 1, such that it is NP-Hard to decide whether also exploit other possible warm-starts, e.g., based on either all constraints are simultaneously satisﬁable or polynomially-solvable special cases [62, 63], where one whether every assignment satisﬁes fewer than an *α* could for example consider low-rank approximations fraction of the constraints. We refer to [102, Chap- of Σ or the SDP [96] as well as analysis of the con- ters 18 and 19] for an excellent overview. vergence properties when using a modiﬁed mixer that By building on the PCP theorem Khot suggested does not have the initial state as eigenstate. One may the Unique Games Conjecture [103] which can be also investigate RQAOA in the context of the con- formulated with two-prover one-round games as well tinuous warm-start discussed in Sec. 3. Furthermore, as unique label cover problems. Here, we state the we may also warm-start quantum optimization algo- UGC with the unique label cover problem as it re- rithms from candidate solutions obtained with classi- lates to MAXCUT [55]. In a unique label cover prob- cal solvers such as CPLEX or GUROBI with a time- lem there is a bipartite graph *G* = (*V, W, E*) with limit termination criterion. partition *V* , *W* and edges *E*, an alphabet *M*, and We expect warm-start to be applicable to other a bijection *πe* : *M →M* for every edge *e ∈E*. We problems within Combinatorial Optimization and In- denote this by *L*(*V, W, E, M, {πe}E*). Given the as- teger Programming, for which a good solution can be signments *AV →M* and *AW →M*, : *V* : *W* found through randomized rounding [52], possibly fol- an edge *e* = (*v, w*) *∈E* is satisﬁed if and only if lowing an encoding into a QUBO [70, 71, 97], a mixed- *πe*(*AW* (*w*)) = *AV* (*v*). Now let opt(*L*) be the maxi- integer linear optimization problem [60], or a polyno- mum weight of edges satisﬁed by any assignment. The mial unconstrained binary optimization problem [90]. Unique Label Cover problem with parameter *δ*, de- Indeed, both the recipe to obtain SDP relaxations [65] noted ULC(*δ*), is the problem of deciding, given an in- and the analytical tools of Appendix D are applicable stance *L*(*V, W, E, M, {πe}E*), whether opt(*L*) *≥*1 *−δ* to linearly constrained problems equally well. For ex- or opt(*L*) *≤δ*, see examples in Fig. 11. Then: ample, the particle-hole representation for VQE can be seen as a form of warm-start [98]. We anticipate **Conjecture 1** (Unique Games Conjecture [103])**.** *For* that WS-QAOA is also applicable to other binary op- *arbitrarily small constants ζ, δ >* 0*, there exists a con-* timization problems for which an approximate solu- *stant k* = *k*(*ζ, δ*) *such that it is NP-Hard to determine* tion can easily be found using relaxed versions of the *whether a unique label cover instance with the label set* problem, without the use of randomized rounding, al- *size k, i.e. k* = *|M|, has optimum at least* 1 *−ζ or at* beit more research needs to be done in this direction. *most δ.* Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 10

#### B

#### Goemans-Williamson Algorithm

(a) (b) The GW algorithm [53] ﬁrst solves the continuous re- laxation of MAXCUT max 1 X *ωij*(1 *−vT i vj*) (7) 2 *i<j* with positive edge weights *ωij*, where the decision variables *vi* are *n*-dimensional vectors with unit Eu- (c) (d) clidean norm instead of binary variables *zi ∈{−*1*,* 1*}*. We denote this *vi ∈Sn* with *S* in plain font, in con- trast to S*n* for symmetric matrices. The relaxation (7) is eﬃciently solvable as a semideﬁnite programming problem [48] to get the optimal vectors *v∗ i* . Next, the GW algorithm generates a cut by select- ing a vector *r* uniformly at random on the unit sphere Figure 11: Unique label cover. (a) and (c) are examples of and assigning *zi* = sign(*rT v∗ i* ) for each node, where unique label cover problems with a graph with four nodes and the sign function returns 1 for non-negative inputs four edges denoted *La* and *Lc*, respectively. The alphabet and -1 elsewhere. That is, the rounding depends on has two colors: orange and blue. (b) An assignment of node colors for *La* where all edges are satisﬁed, i.e. opt(*La*) = 1. which side of the hyperplane (deﬁned by *r*) passing (d) An assignment of node colors for *Lc* where one edge is through the origin the node lies. not satisﬁed. We have opt(*Lc*) = 3*/*4. Informally speaking, cuts generated in this way are guaranteed to be on average 87*.*9% of the size of the maximum cut [53], when averaging over the choice of Under the UGC a canonical semideﬁnite program- the random hyperplane in the case of the positive edge ming relaxation of a constraint satisfaction prob- weights. Formally, lem provides the best possible approximation ratio [55, 104, 105]. Nevertheless, the UGC itself has been **Proposition 2** (Based on Theorem 3.1 in [53])**.** *The* neither proven nor disproven, despite much eﬀort. *expected value, with respect to the random hyper-plane* The closest to proving the UGC, namely Khot *et deﬁned by the vector r, of the cut size W generated by al.* [106], essentially proved the so-called 2-to-2-Games *rounding of the MAXCUT SDP relaxation* (7) *is:* Conjecture, which is a specialisation of the UGC to ﬁ- nite ﬁelds on two elements. Independently, [107, 108] *ωij* Prob[sign(*rT vi*)*̸* = sign(*rT vj*)] E X *W* = have shown that there is a subexponential time ap- 1*≤i<j≤n* proximation for the original Unique Games problem, = 1 which utilizes a hierarchy of LP [108] or SDP [107] re- X *ωij* arccos(*vT i vj*) *π* laxations. This seems to point to the full UGC being 1*≤i<j≤n* true, but does not prove it yet. *≥αW ∗,* (8) Research in quantum complexity is still ongoing. The EPR paradox [109] and the Tsirelson problem *where W ∗denotes the value of the maximum cut and* [110] can be seen as two-prover one-round games in *the hardness factor is* which the provers may share entanglement while the veriﬁer and all communication are classical. In this *α* = 2 *θ π* min 1 *−*cos *θ ≈*0*.*878*.* (9) spirit, Kempe *et al.* [84] showed that the “unique 0*≤θ≤π* games with entangled provers” is false by rounding an SDP relaxation of the value of a unique game with Further, conditional on the Unique Games Conjec- entangled provers and with more than two possible ture [55–57], this is the best possible guarantee that answers, in polynomial time. The “games quantum can be obtained by any classical algorithm in polyno- PCP conjecture”, where one wishes to distinguish be- mial time. tween the cases when the provers of a game with a classical veriﬁer have a strategy using entanglement that succeeds with probability 1, or when no such

#### C

#### Extensions towards QUBO

strategy succeeds with probability larger than 1/2, has been shown to be true under randomized reduc- MAXCUT is a special case of (QUBO)*4*. The GW tions [111]. By contrast, the “constraint satisfaction” performance ratio is valid only for MAXCUT, as the variant of the quantum PCP conjecture [112], which considers constant-factor approximations to the min- *4*Consider the matrix Σ, where for each edge weight *ωij* imal energy of a local Hamiltonian normalized to 1, there is an entry Σ*ij* = Σ*ji* = *−ωij*, and for all other values remains open. there are zeros. Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 11

100 100 % graphs with max. cut found *the randomized rounding of an SDP relaxation [75].* (a) Cut size (% of max. cut) 80 80 This can be used to prove the inapproximability re- sults for MAXCUT with real weights [75], both con- 60 60 ditional and independent of the Unique Games Con- 40 40 jecture. We illustrate the performance of GW on the ran- 20 20 Average Maximum Minimum dom graphs with 30 nodes used in Sec. 4. For each 0 101 102 103 104 105 graph we generate *N* cuts with GW and normal- Number of cuts *N* allowed per graph ize them to the maximum cut which is found with 100 100 % graphs with max. cut found (b) CPLEX. We next calculate the minimum, maximum, Cut size (% of max. cut) 80 80 and average size of these *N* cuts for each graph. Fi- nally, we average the minimum, maximum, and av- 60 60 erage of the 100 graphs, see Fig. 12. The average is 40 40 stable at 85*.*2% and 83*.*7% for the random graphs with *pE* = 1*/*2 and the fully connected graphs, respectively, 20 20 Average Maximum Minimum see Fig. 12(a) and (b). These averages are slightly be- 0 101 102 103 104 105 low the GW approximation ratio*5*. When *N >* 100 Number of cuts *N* allowed per graph the maximum cut for more than 80 of the 100 graphs in Fig. 12(a) is found which is why we chose *N* = 10 Figure 12: (a) and (b) show the size of GW cuts relative to in Sec. 4. When the graphs are fully connected the the maximum cut for the graphs in Fig. 8(b) and (d), respec- GW algorithm does not ﬁnd as many maximum cuts. tively. For each graph, *N* GW cuts are generated and the For instance, 61 maximum cuts are found at *N* = 105 averages, minima, and maxima of the per-graph objective- for fully connected graphs, see Fig. 12(b). function values are computed. These averages, minimums, and maximums are then averaged over the 100 graphs. The dotted-dashed green line shows the fraction of graphs for

#### D

#### A Stochastic-Analysis Viewpoint

which the maximum cut was found. It is harder to ﬁnd the maximum cut on fully connected uniform random graphs Many randomized rounding procedures can be seen than random graphs with *pE* = 1*/*2. from the viewpoint of stochastic analysis: one ob- tains random unit vectors *u*1*, . . . , un ∈Sn* and pro- special case of (QUBO) [75], and likewise the con- duces signs *σ*1*, . . . , σn ∈{−*1*,* 1*}*. In a natural view of stants in the inapproximability results. [79], the sign is extracted when an associated stochas- One can, however, encode most problems in combi- tic process *{uT i B*(*t*)*}t≥*0 ﬁrst reaches *{−*1*,* 1*}*, where natorial optimization into a so-called constraint sat- *{B*(*t*)*}t≥*0 is a Brownian motion in R*n* adapted to the isfaction problem [75, 104, 113], for which there is an ﬁltration *{Ft}t≥*0. The corresponding Sticky Brown- well-known SDP relaxation and a subsequent round- ian Motion *∀i ∈{*1*, . . . , n}* is ing procedure [75, 104, 113]. Likewise, one can derive *σi* := *uT* optimal inapproximability results conditional on the *i B*(*Ti*)*,* (11) Unique Games Conjecture [55–57]. See, for example, where Figure 2 of [56]. For example, for MAXCUT with real-valued edge *Ti* := min*{t ≥*0 : *|uT i B*(*t*)*|* = 1*}.* (12) weights [75], which actually generalises the QUBO we have presented, as it does not assume Σ is symmetric, This can be extended to “Slowed-down” Sticky Brown- we have: ian Motion [79, 80]. Considering ﬁrst a speed function *ϕ* : [*−*1*,* 1] *→*[0*, ∞*) that satisﬁes **Proposition 3** (Based on Lemma 6 in [75])**.** *Let w stand for the total weight of edges in a MAXCUT in- s→*1*−ϕ*(*s*) = lim *s→−*1+ *ϕ*(*s*) = 0 lim (13) *stance, where it is NP-Hard to decide whether the op- timal cut is larger or equal than k or less than αk,* and *where α is the hardness factor* (9) *for MAXCUT. ∀s ∈*(*−*1*,* 1)*, ϕ*(*s*) *>* 0 (14) *Then for every ϵ >* 0 *it is NP-Hard to distinguish* and second a stochastic process *{W ϕ u* (*t*)*}*(*u,t*)*∈*R*n×*[0*,∞*) *instances of QUBO with optimum greater or equal to* that satisﬁes: 2*k −w from instances of QUBO whose optimum is at ∀*(*u, t*) *∈*R*n ×* [0*, ∞*)*, most* 2*αk −w. The ratio of these two bounds on the W ϕ u* (0) = 0*,* (15) *optimum is 5*This could be seen as an instance of a phase transition [114], 2*αk −w* 2*k −w* = *α* + *w α −*1 beyond which the problem becomes computationally diﬃcult 2*k −w.* (10) for classical algorithms running in polynomial time. Notice that the MAX-2-SAT of [114] is closely related to MAXCUT [115]. *Moreover, the optimum hardness factor is achieved by* Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 12

and with sign(*Mi,j*)*zj* to generate a new Ising Hamilto- *uT* d*B*(*t*)*,* d*W ϕ u* (*t*) = *ϕ W ϕ u* (*t*) (16) nian ˆ*Hn−*1 with *n−*1 decision variables. The recursion stops once the number of variables is below a thresh- one obtains, under mild assumptions [79, 80], old *n*stop. The remaining problem is solved with a classical solver. We refer to Appendix C of [24] for *σϕ t→∞W ϕ u* := lim *u* (*t*) *∈{−*1*,* 1*}* a.s. (17) the pseudocode and detailed discussion. For the “Slowed-down” Sticky Brownian Motion [79, 80], one can show:

#### F

#### Depth-one RQAOA

**Proposition 4** (Based on [79])**.** *For u ∈*R*n and t ≥*0 *write W ξ u*(*t*) = *Wu*(*t*) *and σξ u* = *σu ∈{−*1*,* 1*}, where* Depth-one RQAOA can eﬃciently be simulated classi- *ξ*(*s*) = (1 *−s*2)*α, ∀s ∈*[*−*1*,* 1]*,* (18) cally [91]. Here, we show the algorithm we used to eﬃ- ciently simulate depth-one WS-RQAOA. To evaluate *for α >* 0*. Then,* the correlator *⟨*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj⟩*= Tr*{ρi,j* ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj}* we only need the E density matrix *ρi,j* of qubits *i* and *j*, see the circuit in *∀u, v ∈Sd−*1*, σuσv ≈*0*.*878*.* (19) Fig. 13. Qubits *i* and *j* are ﬁrst prepared in the state ( p 1 *−c∗ i |*0*i⟩*+ p *c∗ i |*1*i⟩*) *⊗*(p1 *−c∗ j |*0*j⟩*+ p*c∗ j |*1*j⟩*). For each qubit *k̸* = *i, j*, the cost Hamiltonian applies We note that the constant in (19) is not exactly the the gate ˆ*Ui,k ⊗*ˆ*Uj,k*, where ˆ*Ui,k* is constant of the Goemans-Williamson [53] work. (See also Appendix B.) However, one can consider a dif- ˆ*U*1(*γωi,k*) *⊗*ˆ*U*1(*γωi,k*) *·* C-Phase(*−*2*γωi,k*)*.* (23) ferent speed-function *ξ* to obtain the GW constant. In particular, by seeing the processes as Krivine dif- fusions, one can obtain: Here, the single-qubit gate ˆ*U*1(*φ*) is diag(1*, eiφ*). Since the controlled-phase gate C-Phase(*φ*) = **Proposition 5** (Based on [80])**.** *For u ∈*R*n and* diag(1*,* 1*,* 1*, eiφ*) commutes with the ˆ*U*1 gate we move *t ≥*0 *write W ξ u*(*t*) = *Wu*(*t*) *and σξ u* = *σu ∈{−*1*,* 1*},* all ˆ*U*1 gates to the front of the circuit an apply *where* the phases ˆ*U*1(*γ* P *k̸*=*i,j ωi,k*) and ˆ*U*1(*γ* P *k̸*=*i,j ωj,k*) *√* to qubits *i* and *j*, respectively. Next, we include 2 2 2 Φ*−*1 *√π e−*1 1*−s ∀s ∈*[*−*1*,* 1]*, ξ*(*s*) = *,* (20) 2 the eﬀect of the controlled-phase gate of each qubit *k̸* = *i, j*, initially in the state p1 *−c∗ k |*0*⟩*+ p*c∗ k |*1*⟩*, *where* Φ : R *→*R *is the standard Gaussian cumulative* on the density matrix *ρi,j* by computing (1*−c∗ k*)*ρi,j* + *distribution function, i.e., k* ˆ*Uijkρi,j* ˆ*U †* ˆ*Uijk c∗* where = diag(1*, e−*2*iγωi,k*) *⊗ ijk* Z *x* diag(1*, e−*2*iγωj,k*). Then we apply the two-qubit 1 *e−s*2 *∀x ∈*R*,* 2 d*s.* Φ(*x*) = *√* (21) operation from the *ωi,j* ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj* term, i.e. ˆ*Ui,j* = 2*π ∞* diag(1*, eiγωi,j, eiγωi,j,* 1), and ﬁnally apply the mixer operator before measuring. This is summarized in *Then,* Alg. 1. = 2 *π* arcsin(*uT v*)*. ∀u, v ∈Sd−*1*,* E *σuσv* (22) **Algorithm 1:** Depth-one RQAOA **Initialization:** qubit *i* and *j* in state *|*0*⟩*. Compare this to the statement of Proposition 2, **Output:** Correlator *⟨*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj⟩* noting that arccos(*t*)+arcsin(*t*) = *π/*2 for *−*1 *≤t ≤*1. Apply ˆ*RY* (*θi*) and ˆ*RY* (*θj*) to qubit *i* and *j*. The proof relies in seeing the process as discrete-time Apply ˆ*U*1(*γ* P Krivine diﬀusions [80] and applying Theorem 3 of [80]. *k̸*=*i,j ωi,k*) to qubit *i*. Apply ˆ*U*1(*γ* P *k̸*=*i,j ωj,k*) to qubit *j*.

#### E

#### Recursive QAOA

**for** *k̸* = *i, j* **do* ρi,j ←*(1 *−c∗ k*)*ρi,j* + *c∗ k* ˆ*Uijkρi,j* ˆ*U †* RQAOA [24] is a recursive algorithm to ﬁnd *ijk* ˆ*Hn *end** the ground state of an Ising Hamiltonian = *i,j Ji,j* ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj*+P *k Jk* ˆ*Zk* with *Ji,j, Jk* as arbitrary real Apply *ρi,j ←*ˆ*Ui,jρi,j* ˆ*U †* P *i,j* coeﬃcients and *n* decision variables. At each step of Apply mixer the recursion a standard QAOA is run to ﬁnd the state *|ψ∗⟩*= ˆ*U*(***β****∗,* ***γ****∗*) *|*+*⟩⊗n* that minimizes the energy *e−iβ*( ˆ *H*(*ws*) *M,i ⊗*ˆ *H*(*ws*) *M,j* )*ρi,jeiβ*( ˆ *H*(*ws*) *M,i ⊗*ˆ *H*(*ws*) *M,j* ) *⟨ψ∗|* ˆ*Hn|ψ∗⟩*. For each edge (*i, j*) *∈E* the correlator Measure correlator *⟨*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj⟩*= Tr*{ρi,j* ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj} Mi,j* = *⟨ψ∗|* ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj|ψ∗⟩*is computed. Next, the deci- sion variable *zi* for which *|Mij|* is largest is replaced Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 13

ˆ*Ui,k* ˆ*Uj,k*

| \|0⟩k Rˆ (θ k) Y |  | Uˆ (γω ) 1 i,k |  |  | Uˆ (γω ) 1 j,k |  |  |  |  | e−iβ Hˆ M(w ,s k) |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | • |  |  |
| \|0⟩i Rˆ Y (θ i) Uˆ 1(γω i,k) Uˆ 1(−2γω i,k) e−iβ Hˆ M(w ,s i) Uˆ i,j \|0⟩j Rˆ Y (θ j) Uˆ 1(γω j,k) Uˆ 1(−2γω j,k) e−iβ Hˆ M(w ,s j) |  | Uˆ 1(γω i,k) Uˆ 1(−2γω i,k) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  | Uˆ (γω ) 1 i,k |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | Uˆ 1(γω j,k) Uˆ 1(−2γω j,k) |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | Uˆ (γω ) 1 j,k |  | Uˆ 1(−2γω j,k) |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Figure 13: Quantum circuit used to compute the correlator *⟨*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj⟩*. The gates highlighted in red do not need to be taken into account.

#### G

#### MAXCUT reduction

1.0 Here we show that replacing ˆ*Zi* by *±* ˆ*Zj* in a MAXCUT 0.8 problem results in a new MAXCUT problem with one node less. Without loss of generality we label the 0.6 *E*/*Emc* nodes from 1 to *n* such that the spin operator ˆ*Zn* of node *n* will be replaced by ˆ*Zn* = *α* ˆ*Zk* with *α* = *±*1 and 0.4 *k < n*. The MAXCUT Hamiltonian of the weighted graph is 0.2 *n* 0.0 ˆ*H* =1 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj* X *ωi,j* (24) 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 4 *i,j*=1 Regularization parameter *n−*1 *n−*1 =1 + 1 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj* 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zn* X X *ωi,j ωi,n* Figure 14: Energy, normalized to the energy of the maximum 4 2 *i,j*=1 *i*=1 cut, as a function of *ε* for a depth one WS-QAOA. The graphs are the same as those in Fig. 7 but we used the mixer from We now replace ˆ*Zn* = *α* ˆ*Zk* in the last term and, since Eq. (2) which cannot reproduce the GW at *ε* = 0*.*25 and 1 *−α* ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zk* 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zk* depth one. *ωi,n* = *αωi,n* + *ωi,n*(1 *−α*), we may write

#### H

#### Portfolio data

*n−*1 *n−*1 X 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zn* X *ωi,n* = *ωi,n*(1 *−α*) The return vectors and covariance matrices used in Sec. 3 are obtained by simulating the price of each *i*=1 *i*=1 *n−*1 asset following a Geometric Brownian motion for *N* = X 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zk* 250 days. The price of asset *i* on the *k*th day is + *αωi,n .* (25) *i*=1 (*µi −σ*2 *Si,k* = *Si,*0 exp *i /*2)*k/N* + *σiWk .* (28) We neglect the ﬁrst sum since it is an energy oﬀset Without loss of generality we set the initial price that does not aﬀect the optimization. The Hamilto- *Si,*0 = 1. We randomly chose each mean *µi* and nian of the reduced problem is therefore standard deviation *σi* uniformly form [*−*5%*,* 5%] and [*−*20%*,* 20%], respectively. The Brownian motion is *n−*1 *√* ˆ*Hn−*1 =1 X 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zj* given by *Wk* = P*j ωi,j N* where *zl* is drawn from *l*=0 *zl/* 4 the normal distribution. The return of asset *i* on the *i,j*=1 *k*th day is *ri,k* = *Si,k/Si,k−*1 *−*1. The average of *ri,k n−*1 +1 X 1 *−*ˆ*Zi* ˆ*Zk αωi,n* (26) gives the mean return of asset *i* and the covariance 2 of asset *i* and *j* is obtained from *ri,k* and *rj,k* where *i*=1 *k* = 1*, ..., N*. This Hamiltonian corresponds to a new graph *E′* in which the weights *ω′ i,j* with *i, j* = 1*, ..., n−*1 have been

#### I

#### WS-QAOA for MAXCUT with the

updated according to

#### warm-start mixer

if *ωi,j j̸* = *k, ω′ ij* = (27) if *ωi,j* + *αωi,n j* = *k.* In the main text we modiﬁed the WS mixer to retain the GW cut. Here, we explore WS-QAOA for MAX- Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 14

| 40 100 40 100 36 (a) Warm-start RQAOA 36 (c) counts counts 32 32 28 Warm-start RQAOA modified mixer 75 28 75 Counts Counts 24 24 20 50 20 50 cut cut 16 16 12 12 25 25 Max. Max. 8 8 4 4 0 0 0 0 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100 Cut size (% of maximum cut) Cut size (% of maximum cut) 40 100 40 100 36 (b) 36 (d) counts counts 32 32 75 75 28 28 Counts Counts 24 24 20 50 20 50 cut cut 16 16 12 12 25 25 Max. Max. 8 8 4 4 0 0 0 0 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100 84 86 88 90 92 94 96 98 100 Cut size (% of maximum cut) Cut size (% of maximum cut) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
|  | 40 36 ( 32 28 Counts 24 20 16 12 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  | 100 75 50 25 |  |  |  | Max. cut counts | 40 36 ( 32 28 Counts 24 20 16 12 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  | 100 75 50 25 |  |  |  |  | Max. cut counts |
|  |  | ( | a) |  | Warm-start RQAOA |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ( | c) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  | Warm-start RQAOA modified mixer |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 0 100 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 0 100 |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  | 40 36 32 28 Counts 24 20 16 12 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 100 75 50 25 | Max. cut counts | 40 36 32 28 Counts 24 20 16 12 8 4 |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | 100 75 50 25 |  |
|  |  | ( | b) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  | ( | d) |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

Figure 15: Histograms of cut sizes, relative to the maximum cut found by CPLEX, for WS-RQAOA with the modiﬁed mixer (red, same data as in Fig. 8), and the WS-QAOA with the mixer from Eq. (2). The dashed line shows the hardness factor 11*/*13. CUT with the mixer of Eq. (2). By repeating the Stefan Filipp. Gate-eﬃcient simulation of analysis done in Fig. 7 we observe that the energy, molecular eigenstates on a quantum computer. normalized to the maximum, decreases as a function *Phys. Rev. Applied*, 11:044092, Apr 2019. DOI: of *ε* and does not recover at *ε* = 0*.*25, see Fig. 14. 10.1103/PhysRevApplied.11.044092. In addition, we repeat the analysis done in Fig. 8 [4] Jacob Biamonte, Peter Wittek, Nicola Pancotti, but with the mixer of Eq. (2) and compare it to WS- Patrick Rebentrost, Nathan Wiebe, and Seth RQAOA with the modiﬁed mixer. Both algorithms Lloyd. Quantum machine learning. *Nature*, have a similar performance, see Fig. 15, which sug- 549(7671):195–202, 2017. DOI: 10.1038/na- gests that the amount of correlation between the vari- ture23474. ables at each iteration, e.g. as in Fig. 14, is still suf- [5] Vojtech Havlicek, Antonio D. Corcoles, Kristan ﬁcient for WS-RQAOA to produce good results even Temme, Aram W. Harrow, Abhinav Kandala, though the GW cut cannot be sampled with certainty Jerry M. Chow, and Jay M. Gambetta. Su- at each iteration. As the size and complexity of the pervised learning with quantum-enhanced fea- graphs is increased the performance of WS-RQAOA ture spaces. *Nature*, 567:209 – 212, 2019. DOI: with the mixer from Eq. (2) decreases compared to 10.1038/s41586-019-0980-2. WS-RQAOA with the modiﬁed mixer and indicates [6] Daniel J. Egger, Claudio Gambella, Jakub the importance of being able to retain the GW cut. Mareček, Scott McFaddin, Martin Mevissen, Rudy Raymond, Aandrea Simonetto, Sefan Wo- erner, and Elena Yndurain. Quantum com-

#### References

puting for ﬁnance: State-of-the-art and future prospects. *IEEE Trans. on Quantum Eng.*, 1: [1] Nikolaj Moll, Panagiotis Barkoutsos, Lev S. 1–24, 2020. DOI: 10.1109/TQE.2020.3030314. Bishop, Jerry M. Chow, Andrew Cross, [7] Stefan Woerner and Daniel J. Egger. Quan- Daniel J. Egger, Stefan Filipp, Andreas Fuhrer, tum risk analysis. *npj Quantum Inf.*, 5:15, 2019. Jay M. Gambetta, Marc Ganzhorn, and *et al.* DOI: 10.1038/s41534-019-0130-6. Quantum optimization using variational algo- [8] Patrick Rebentrost, Brajesh Gupt, and rithms on near-term quantum devices. *Quan-* Thomas R. Bromley. Quantum computational *tum Sci. Technol.*, 3(3):030503, 2018. DOI: ﬁnance: Monte Carlo pricing of ﬁnancial 10.1088/2058-9565/aab822. derivatives. *Phys. Rev. A*, 98:022321, Aug [2] Abhinav Kandala, Kristan Temme, Antonio
1. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevA.98.022321.

D. Corcoles, Antonio Mezzacapo, Jerry M. [9] Nikitas Stamatopoulos, Daniel J. Egger, Yue Chow, and Jay M. Gambetta. Error mitiga- Sun, Christa Zoufal, Raban Iten, Ning Shen, tion extends the computational reach of a noisy and Stefan Woerner. Option pricing using quan- quantum processor. *Nature*, 567:491–495, 2018. tum computers. *Quantum*, 4:291, 2020. DOI: DOI: 10.1038/s41586-019-1040-7. 10.22331/q-2020-07-06-291. [3] Marc Ganzhorn, Daniel J. Egger, Panagio- [10] Ana Martin, Bruno Candelas, Ángel Rodríguez- tis Kl. Barkoutsos, Pauline Ollitrault, Gian Rozas, José D. Martín-Guerrero, Xi Chen, Lu- Salis, Nikolaj Moll, Andreas Fuhrer, Peter cas Lamata, Román Orús, Enrique Solano, and Mueller, Stefan Woerner, Ivano Tavernelli, and Mikel Sanz. Toward pricing ﬁnancial derivatives Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 15

with an ibm quantum computer. *Phys. Rev. Re-* computations on chimera graphs, 2019. URL *search*, 3:013167, Feb 2021. DOI: 10.1103/Phys- https://arxiv.org/abs/1904.11965. RevResearch.3.013167. [22] Rami Barends, Alireza Shabani, Lucas Lamata, [11] Roman Orus, Samuel Mugel, and Enrique Julian Kelly, Antonio Mezzacapo, Urtzi Lizaso. Quantum computing for ﬁnance: Las Heras, Ryan Babbush, Austin G. Fowler, Overview and prospects. *Rev. Phys.*, 4:100028, Brooks Campbell, Yu Chen, and *et al.* Dig-
1. DOI: 10.1016/j.revip.2019.100028.

itized adiabatic quantum computing with a [12] Daniel J. Egger, Ricardo G. Gutierrez, superconducting circuit. *Nature*, 534(7606): Jordi Cahue Mestre, and Stefan Woerner. 222–226, Jun 2016. DOI: 10.1038/nature17658. Credit risk analysis using quantum computers. [23] Madita Willsch, Dennis Willsch, Fengping Jin, *IEEE Trans. Comput.*, 1:1–1, Nov 2020. DOI: Hans De Raedt, and Kristel Michielsen. Bench- 10.1109/TC.2020.3038063. marking the quantum approximate optimiza- tion algorithm. *Quantum Inf. Process.*, 19(7): [13] Almudena Carrera Vazquez and Stefan Wo- 197, Jun 2020. DOI: 10.1007/s11128-020-02692- erner. Eﬃcient state preparation for quantum
1. [24] Sergey

amplitude estimation. *Phys. Rev. Applied*, 15: 034027, Mar 2021. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevAp- Bravyi, Alexander Kliesch, Robert plied.15.034027. Koenig, and Eugene Tang. Obstacles to vari- [14] Lee Braine, Daniel J. Egger, Jennifer Glick, and ational quantum optimization from symmetry Stefan Woerner. Quantum algorithms for mixed protection. *Phys. Rev. Lett.*, 125:260505, Dec binary optimization applied to transaction set-
1. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.260505.

tlement. *IEEE Trans. on Quantum Eng.*, 2:1–8, [25] Gavin E. Crooks. Performance of the quan-
1. DOI: 10.1109/TQE.2021.3063635.

tum approximate optimization algorithm on the [15] Panagiotis Kl. Barkoutsos, Giacomo Nannicini, maximum cut problem, 2018. URL https: Anton Robert, Ivano Tavernelli, and Stefan Wo- //arxiv.org/abs/1811.08419. erner. Improving variational quantum optimiza- [26] Edward Farhi, Jeﬀrey Goldstone, Sam Gut- tion using cvar. *Quantum*, 4:256, Apr 2020. mann, and Hartmut Neven. Quantum algo- DOI: 10.22331/q-2020-04-20-256. rithms for ﬁxed qubit architectures, 2017. URL [16] Edward Farhi, Jeﬀrey Goldstone, and Sam Gut- https://arxiv.org/abs/1703.06199. mann. A quantum approximate optimization al- [27] Stuart Hadﬁeld, Zhihui Wang, Bryan gorithm, 2014. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ O’Gorman, Eleanor Rieﬀel, Davide Ven- 1411.4028. turelli, and Rupak Biswas. From the quantum [17] Edward Farhi, Jeﬀrey Goldstone, and Sam Gut- approximate optimization algorithm to a quan- mann. A quantum approximate optimization al- tum alternating operator ansatz. *Algorithms*, gorithm applied to a bounded occurrence con- 12(2):34, Feb 2019. DOI: 10.3390/a12020034. straint problem, 2014. URL https://arxiv. [28] Linghua Zhu, Ho Lun Tang, George S. Bar- org/abs/1412.6062. ron, Nicholas J. Mayhall, Edwin Barnes, and [18] Zhi-Cheng Yang, Armin Rahmani, Alireza Sha- Sophia E. Economou. An adaptive quantum bani, Hartmut Neven, and Claudio Chamon. approximate optimization algorithm for solv- Optimizing variational quantum algorithms us- ing combinatorial problems on a quantum com- ing pontryagin’s minimum principle. *Phys. Rev.* puter, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ *X*, 7:021027, May 2017. DOI: 10.1103/Phys- 2005.10258. RevX.7.021027. [29] Zhihui Wang, Nicholas C. Rubin, Jason M. [19] Mark W. Johnson, Mohammad HS Amin, Dominy, and Eleanor G. Rieﬀel. XY mixers: Suzanne Gildert, Trevor Lanting, Firas Hamze, Analytical and numerical results for the quan- Neil Dickson, Richard Harris, Andrew J. tum alternating operator ansatz. *Phys. Rev.* Berkley, Jan Johansson, Paul Bunyk, and *et al. A*, 101:012320, Jan 2020. DOI: 10.1103/Phys- Quantum annealing with manufactured spins. RevA.101.012320. *Nature*, 473(7346):194–198, May 2011. DOI: [30] Sami Khairy, Ruslan Shaydulin, Lukasz Cin- 10.1038/nature10012. cio, Yuri Alexeev, and Prasanna Balaprakash. [20] Glen Bigan Mbeng, Rosario Fazio, and Learning to optimize variational quantum cir- cuits to solve combinatorial problems. *Proceed-* Giuseppe Santoro. Quantum annealing: a jour- ney through digitalization, control, and hy- *ings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial In-* brid quantum variational schemes, 2019. URL *telligence*, 34(03):2367–2375, Apr 2020. DOI: https://arxiv.org/abs/1906.08948. 10.1609/aaai.v34i03.5616. [21] Michael Juenger, Elisabeth Lobe, Petra Mutzel, [31] Matteo M. Wauters, Emanuele Panizon, Gerhard Reinelt, Franz Rendl, Giovanni Ri- Glen B. Mbeng, and Giuseppe E. San- naldi, and Tobias Stollenwerk. Performance toro. Reinforcement-learning-assisted quan- of a quantum annealer for Ising ground state tum optimization. *Phys. Rev. Research*, 2: Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 16

033446, Sep 2020. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevRe- proximate optimization algorithms. *IFAC-* search.2.033446. *PapersOnLine*, 53(2):242–249,
1. DOI:

[32] Ruslan Shaydulin, Ilya Safro, and Jeﬀrey Lar- 10.1016/j.ifacol.2020.12.130. 21th IFAC World son. Multistart methods for quantum ap- Congress. proximate optimization. [42] Nathan Lacroix, Christoph Hellings, Chris- *2019 IEEE High* tian Kraglund Andersen, Agustin Di Paolo, *Performance Extreme Computing Conference (HPEC)*, pages 1–8, Sep
1. DOI:

Ants Remm, Stefania Lazar, Sebastian Krinner, 10.1109/HPEC.2019.8916288. Graham J. Norris, Mihai Gabureac, Johannes [33] Ruslan Shaydulin and Yuri Alexeev. Evalu- Heinsoo, and *et al.* Improving the performance ating quantum approximate optimization al- of deep quantum optimization algorithms with gorithm: A case study. In *2019 Tenth In-* continuous gate sets. *PRX Quantum*, 1: 110304, Oct 2020. DOI: 10.1103/PRXQuan- *ternational Green and Sustainable Computing Conference (IGSC)*, pages 1–6, 2019. DOI: tum.1.020304. 10.1109/IGSC48788.2019.8957201. [43] Nathan Earnest, Caroline Tornow, and Daniel J. Egger. Pulse-eﬃcient circuit [34] Roeland Wiersema, Cunlu Zhou, Yvette transpilation for quantum applications on de Sereville, Juan Felipe Carrasquilla, cross-resonance-based hardware, 2021. URL Yong Baek Kim, and Henry Yuen. Exploring https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.01063. entanglement and optimization within the hamiltonian variational ansatz. *PRX Quantum*, [44] Pranav Gokhale, Ali Javadi-Abhari, Nathan 1:020319, Dec 2020. DOI: 10.1103/PRXQuan- Earnest, Yunong Shi, and Frederic T. Chong. tum.1.020319. Optimized quantum compilation for near- [35] Fernando G. S. L. Brandao, Michael Broughton, term algorithms with openpulse, 2020. URL Edward Farhi, Sam Gutmann, and Hartmut https://www.microarch.org/micro53/ Neven. For ﬁxed control parameters the quan- papers/738300a186.pdf. tum approximate optimization algorithm’s ob- [45] David C. McKay, Thomas Alexander, Luciano jective function value concentrates for typical Bello, Michael J. Biercuk, Lev Bishop, Ji- instances, 2018. URL https://arxiv.org/ ayin Chen, Jerry M. Chow, Antonio D. Cór- abs/1812.04170. coles, Daniel J. Egger, Stefan Filipp, and *et* [36] Matthew B. Hastings. Classical and quan- Qiskit backend speciﬁcations for Open- *al.* tum bounded depth approximation algorithms, QASM and OpenPulse experiments, 2018. URL
1. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.

https://arxiv.org/abs/1809.03452.
1. [37] Sergey

[46] Thomas Alexander, Naoki Kanazawa, Daniel J. Egger, Lauren Capelluto, Christopher J. Wood, Bravyi, Alexander Kliesch, Robert Ali Javadi-Abhari, and David C. McKay. Koenig, and Eugene Tang. Hybrid quantum- Qiskit pulse: programming quantum comput- classical algorithms for approximate graph col- ers through the cloud with pulses. oring, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ *Quantum* 2011.13420. *Sci. Technol.*, 5(4):044006, Aug 2020. DOI: 10.1088/2058-9565/aba404. [38] Mahabubul Alam, Abdullah Ash-Saki, and Swaroop Ghosh. Analysis of quantum approx- [47] Anirudha Majumdar, Georgina Hall, and imate optimization algorithm under realistic Amir Ali Ahmadi. Recent scalability improve- noise in superconducting qubits, 2019. URL ments for semideﬁnite programming with ap- https://arxiv.org/abs/1907.09631. plications in machine learning, control, and [39] Vishwanathan Akshay, Hariphan Philathong, robotics. *Annu. Rev. Control Robot. Auton.* Mauro E. S. Morales, and Jacob D. Biamonte. *Syst.*, 3:331–360, 2020. DOI: 10.1146/annurev- Reachability deﬁcits in quantum approximate control-091819-074326. optimization. *Phys. Rev. Lett.*, 124:090504, Mar [48] Miguel F. Anjos and Jean B. Lasserre. *Hand-*
1. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.124.090504.

*book on semideﬁnite, conic and polynomial opti- mization*, volume 166. Springer Science & Busi- [40] Matthew P. Harrigan, Kevin J. Sung, Matthew ness Media, 2011. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614- Neeley, Kevin J. Satzinger, Frank Arute, Kunal 0769-0. Arya, Juan Atalaya, Joseph C. Bardin, Rami Barends, Sergio Boixo, and *et al.* Quantum [49] Lenore Blum, Felipe Cucker, Michael Shub, and approximate optimization of non-planar graph Steve Smale. *Complexity and real computation*. problems on a planar superconducting proces- Springer Science & Business Media, 2012. DOI: sor. *Nat. Phys.*, 17(3):332–336, Mar 2021. DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4612-0701-6. 10.1038/s41567-020-01105-y. [50] Lorant Porkolab and Leonid Khachiyan. On [41] Yulong Dong, Xiang Meng, Lin Lin, Robert the complexity of semideﬁnite programs. *J.* Kosut, and K. Birgitta Whaley. Ro- *Glob. Optim.*, 10(4):351–365,
1. DOI:

bust control optimization for quantum ap- 10.1023/A:1008203903341. Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 17

[51] Alp Yurtsever, Joel A. Tropp, Olivier Fer- quadratic optimization problems with box con- coq, Madeleine Udell, and Volkan Cevher. straints. *arXiv:1911.10877*, 2019. URL https: Scalable semideﬁnite programming. *SIAM J.* //arxiv.org/abs/1911.10877. *Math. Data Sci.*, 3(1):171–200, 2021. DOI: [64] Jacek Gondzio and Andreas Grothey. Solving 10.1137/19M1305045. nonlinear ﬁnancial planning problems with 109 [52] Prabhakar Raghavan and Clark D. Tompson. decision variables on massively parallel archi- Randomized rounding: A technique for prov- tectures. *WIT Trans Modelling Simul.*, 43:11, ably good algorithms and algorithmic proofs.
1. DOI: 10.2495/CF060101.

*Combinatorica*, 7(4):365–374, Dec 1987. DOI: [65] Svatopluk Poljak, Franz Rendl, and Henry 10.1007/BF02579324. Wolkowicz. A recipe for semideﬁnite re- [53] Michel X. Goemans and David P. Williamson. laxation for (0, 1)-quadratic programming. Improved approximation algorithms for *J. Glob. Optim.*, 7(1):51–73,
1. DOI:

maximum cut and satisﬁability prob- 10.1007/BF01100205. lems using semideﬁnite programming. *J.* [66] Joran Van Apeldoorn, András Gilyén, Sander *ACM*, 42(6):1115–1145, nov
1. DOI:

Gribling, and Ronald de Wolf. Quantum SDP- 10.1145/227683.227684. solvers: Better upper and lower bounds. *Quan-* [54] Howard Karloﬀ. How good is the Goemans– *tum*, 4:230, 2020. DOI: 10.22331/q-2020-02-14- Williamson MAX CUT algorithm? *SIAM*
1. [67] Fernando G. S. L. Brandão,

*Comput.*, 29(1):336–350,
1. DOI:

*J.* Amir Kalev, 10.1137/S0097539797321481. Tongyang Li, Cedric Yen-Yu Lin, Krysta M. [55] Subhash Khot, Guy Kindler, Elchanan Mossel, Svore, and Xiaodi Wu. Quantum SDP Solvers: and Ryan O’Donnell. Optimal inapproximabil- Large Speed-Ups, Optimality, and Applica- ity results for MAX-CUT and other 2-variable tions to Quantum Learning. In *46th Inter-* CSPs? *SIAM J. Comput.*, 37(1):319–357, 2007. *national Colloquium on Automata, Languages,* DOI: 10.1137/S0097539705447372. *and Programming (ICALP 2019)*, volume 132 of [56] Subhas Khot. On the unique games conjecture *Leibniz International Proceedings in Informat-* (invited survey). In *2012 IEEE 27th Confer- ics (LIPIcs)*, pages 27:1–27:14, Dagstuhl, Ger- *ence on Computational Complexity*, pages 99– many, 2019. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum 121, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, jun 2010. IEEE für Informatik. ISBN 978-3-95977-109-2. DOI: Computer Society. DOI: 10.1109/CCC.2010.19. 10.4230/LIPIcs.ICALP.2019.27. [57] Subhash A. Khot and Nisheeth K. Vishnoi. The [68] Nai-Hui Chia, Tongyang Li, Han-Hsuan Lin, unique games conjecture, integrality gap for cut and Chunhao Wang. Quantum-Inspired Sublin- problems and embeddability of negative-type ear Algorithm for Solving Low-Rank Semideﬁ- metrics into l1. *J. ACM*, 62(1):1–39, 2015. DOI: nite Programming. In *45th International Sym-* 10.1145/2629614. *posium on Mathematical Foundations of Com-* [58] Kunal Marwaha. Local classical MAX-CUT al- *puter Science (MFCS 2020)*, volume 170 of gorithm outperforms *p* = 2 QAOA on high-girth *Leibniz International Proceedings in Informat-* regular graphs. *Quantum*, 5:437, April 2021. *ics (LIPIcs)*, pages 23:1–23:15, Dagstuhl, Ger- DOI: 10.22331/q-2021-04-20-437. many, 2020. Schloss Dagstuhl–Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik. ISBN 978-3-95977-159-7. DOI: [59] Peter L. Hammer and Sergiu Rudeanu. *Boolean* 10.4230/LIPIcs.MFCS.2020.23. *methods in operations research and related ar-* [69] Jacek Gondzio. Warm start of the primal-dual *eas*. Springer Science & Business Media, 1968. method applied in the cutting-plane scheme. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-85823-9. *Math. Program.*, 83(1-3):125–143, 1998. DOI: [60] Jean B. Lasserre. A MAX-CUT formulation of 10.1007/BF02680554. 0/1 programs. *Oper. Res. Lett.*, 44(2):158 – 164,
1. DOI: 10.1016/j.orl.2015.12.014.

[70] Andrew Lucas. Ising formulations of many [61] Panos M. Pardalos and Georg Schnitger. NP problems. *Front. Phys.*, 2:5, 2014. DOI: Checking local optimality in constrained 10.3389/fphy.2014.00005. quadratic programming is np-hard. *Oper. Res.* [71] Bas Lodewijks. Mapping np-hard and NP- *Lett.*, 7(1):33–35, 1988. DOI: 10.1016/0167- complete optimisation problems to quadratic 6377(88)90049-1. unconstrained binary optimisation problems. *arXiv:1911.08043*, 2019. URL https://arxiv. [62] Kim Allemand, Komei Fukuda, Thomas M org/abs/1911.08043. Liebling, and Erich Steiner. A polynomial case of unconstrained zero-one quadratic optimiza- [72] Jean B. Lasserre. Global optimization with tion. *Math. Program.*, 91(1):49–52, 2001. DOI: polynomials and the problem of moments. 10.1007/s101070100233. *SIAM J. Optim.*, 11(3):796–817, 2001. DOI: 10.1137/S1052623400366802. [63] Milan Hladík, Michal Černý, and Miroslav Rada. A new polynomially solvable class of [73] Jean B. Lasserre. Convergent SDP-relaxations Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 18

in polynomial optimization with sparsity. Brassard, and Umesh Vazirani. Strengths and *SIAM J. Optim.*, 17(3):822–843, 2006. DOI: weaknesses of quantum computing. *SIAM* 10.1137/05064504X. *J. Comput.*, 26(5):1510–1523,
1. DOI:

[74] Bissan Ghaddar, Juan C. Vera, and Miguel F. 10.1137/S0097539796300933. Anjos. Second-order cone relaxations for bi- [86] Harry Markowitz. Portfolio selection. *J. Fi-* nary quadratic polynomial programs. *nance*, 7(1):77–91, 1952. DOI: 10.2307/2975974. *SIAM Optim.*, 21(1):391–414,
1. DOI:

[87] H. Abraham et al. Qiskit: An open-source *J.* 10.1137/100802190. framework for quantum computing, 2019. URL [75] Moses Charikar and Anthony Wirth. Max- https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.2562111. imizing quadratic programs: Extending [88] Johan Håstad. Some optimal inapproximability Grothendieck’s inequality. In *45th Annual* results. *J. ACM*, 48(4):798–859, 2001. DOI: *IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer* 10.1145/502090.502098. *Science*, pages 54–60. IEEE, 2004. DOI: [89] Vishwanathan Akshay, Hariphan Philathong, 10.1109/FOCS.2004.39. Igor Zacharov, and Jacob D. Biamonte. Reach- [76] Mikhail Krechetov, Jakub Mareček, Yury Max- ability deﬁcits implicit in google’s quantum imov, and Martin Takáč. Entropy-penalized approximate optimization of graph problems, semideﬁnite programming. In *Proceedings of*
1. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.

*the Twenty-Eighth International Joint Confer-*
1. [90] Rebekah Herrman, James Ostrowski, Travis S.

*ence on Artiﬁcial Intelligence*, 2019. DOI: 10.24963/ijcai.2019/157. Humble, and George Siopsis. Lower bounds on [77] Sartaj Sahni and Teoﬁlo Gonzalez. P-complete circuit depth of the quantum approximate op- approximation problems. *J. ACM*, 23(3):555– timization algorithm. *Quantum Inf. Process.*, 565, 1976. DOI: 10.1145/321958.321975. See 20(2):59, Feb 2021. DOI: 10.1007/s11128-021- Lemma A2. 03001-7. [78] Michael Mitzenmacher and Eli Upfal. *Probabil-* [91] Zhihui Wang, Stuart Hadﬁeld, Zhang Jiang, and Eleanor G. Rieﬀel. Quantum approximate *ity and computing: Randomization and proba-* optimization algorithm for maxcut: A fermionic *bilistic techniques in algorithms and data anal- ysis*. Cambridge university press, 2017. view. *Phys. Rev. A*, 97:022304, Feb 2018. DOI: [79] Sepehr Abbasi-Zadeh, Nikhil Bansal, Guru Gu- 10.1103/PhysRevA.97.022304. ruganesh, Aleksandar Nikolov, Roy Schwartz, [92] Leo Zhou, Sheng-Tao Wang, Soonwon Choi, and Mohit Singh. Sticky brownian rounding Hannes Pichler, and Mikhail D. Lukin. Quan- and its applications to constraint satisfaction tum approximate optimization algorithm: Per- problems. In *Proceedings of the Fourteenth An-* formance, mechanism, and implementation on near-term devices. *Phys. Rev. X*, 10:021067, Jun *nual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Al- gorithms*, pages 854–873. SIAM, 2020. DOI:
1. DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevX.10.021067.

10.1137/1.9781611975994.52. [93] Jason Larkin, Matías Jonsson, Daniel Justice, [80] Ronen Eldan and Assaf Naor. Krivine diﬀusions and Gian Giacomo Guerreschi. Evaluation of attain the goemans–williamson approximation quantum approximate optimization algorithm ratio. *arXiv:1906.10615*, 2019. URL https: based on the approximation ratio of single sam- //arxiv.org/abs/1906.10615. ples, 2020. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ [81] Jamie Morgenstern, Samira Samadi, Mohit 2006.04831. Singh, Uthaipon Tantipongpipat, and Santosh [94] qiskit-optimization. https://github.com/ Vempala. Fair dimensionality reduction and it- Qiskit/qiskit-optimization. Accessed: 25. erative rounding for SDPs. *arXiv:1902.11281*,
1. 2021.
2. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1902.

[95] Andreas Bärtschi and Stephan Eidenbenz. 11281v1. Grover mixers for qaoa: Shifting complexity [82] Samuel Karlin and Howard E. Taylor. *A second* from mixer design to state preparation. In *2020 course in stochastic processes*. Elsevier, 1981. p. *IEEE International Conference on Quantum* 257 and the following. *Computing and Engineering (QCE)*, pages 72– [83] Julia Kempe, Oded Regev, and Ben Toner. The 82, 2020. DOI: 10.1109/QCE49297.2020.00020. unique games conjecture with entangled provers [96] Reuben Tate, Majid Farhadi, Creston Herold, is false. In *Algebraic Methods in Computational* Greg Mohler, and Swati Gupta. Bridging clas- *Complexity*, 2007. sical and quantum with SDP initialized warm- [84] Julia Kempe, Oded Regev, and Ben Toner. starts for QAOA, 2020. URL https://arxiv. Unique games with entangled provers are easy. org/abs/2010.14021. *SIAM J. Comput.*, 39(7):3207–3229, 2010. DOI: [97] Iain Dunning, Swati Gupta, and John Silber- 10.1137/090772885. holz. What works best when? a systematic eval- [85] Charles H. Bennett, Ethan Bernstein, Gilles uation of heuristics for Max-Cut and QUBO. Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 19

*INFORMS J. Comput.*, 30(3):608–624, 2018. *ence (FOCS)*, pages 943–953. IEEE, 2020. DOI: DOI: 10.1287/ijoc.2017.0798. 10.1109/FOCS46700.2020.00092. [98] Panagiotis Kl. Barkoutsos, Jerome F. Gonthier, [109] Albert Einstein, Boris Podolsky, and Nathan Igor Sokolov, Nikolaj Moll, Gian Salis, An- Rosen. Can quantum-mechanical description of dreas Fuhrer, Marc Ganzhorn, Daniel J. Egger, physical reality be considered complete? *Phys.* Matthias Troyer, Antonio Mezzacapo, and *et Rev.*, 47(10):777, 1935. DOI: 10.1103/Phys- *al.* Quantum algorithms for electronic structure Rev.47.777. calculations: Particle-hole hamiltonian and op- [110] Boris S. Cirel’son. Quantum generalizations of Bell’s inequality. *Lett. Math. Phys.*, 4(2):93– timized wave-function expansions. *Phys. Rev.* 100, 1980. DOI: 10.1007/BF00417500. *A*, 98:022322, Aug 2018. DOI: 10.1103/Phys- [111] A. Natarajan and T. Vidick. Low-degree test- RevA.98.022322. ing for quantum states, and a quantum entan- [99] Sanjeev Arora and Shmuel Safra. Probabilis- gled games PCP for QMA. In *Proceedings of* tic checking of proofs: A new characterization of np. *J. ACM*, 45(1):70–122, 1998. DOI: *the ﬁftyninth Annual Symposium on Founda- tions of Computer Science (FOCS)*, pages 731– 10.1145/273865.273901. 742, 2018. DOI: 10.1109/FOCS.2018.00075. [100] Sanjeev Arora, Carsten Lund, Rajeev Motwani, [112] Dorit Aharonov, Itai Arad, Zeph Landau, and Madhu Sudan, and Mario Szegedy. Proof veriﬁ- Umesh Vazirani. The detectability lemma and cation and the hardness of approximation prob- quantum gap ampliﬁcation. In *Proceedings of* lems. *J. ACM*, 45(3):501–555, 1998. DOI: 10.1145/278298.278306. *the Forty-First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing*, STOC ’09, pages 417– [101] Irit Dinur. The PCP theorem by gap ampliﬁ- 426, New York, NY, USA, 2009. Association for cation. *J. ACM*, 54(3):12–es, jun 2007. DOI: Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781605585062. 10.1145/1236457.1236459. DOI: 10.1145/1536414.1536472. [102] Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak. *Computational* [113] Moses Charikar, Konstantin Makarychev, and *a modern approach*. Cambridge *complexity:* Yury Makarychev. Near-optimal algorithms University Press, 2009. for unique games. In *Proceedings of the* [103] Subhash Khot. On the power of unique 2-prover *thirty-eighth annual ACM symposium on The-* 1-round games. In *Proceedings of the Thiry- ory of computing*, pages 205–214, 2006. DOI: *Fourth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of* 10.1145/1132516.1132547. *Computing*, STOC ’02, pages 767–775, New [114] Dimitris Achlioptas, Assaf Naor, and Yuval York, NY, USA, 2002. Association for Comput- Peres. Rigorous location of phase transitions in ing Machinery. DOI: 10.1145/509907.510017. hard optimization problems. *Nature*, 435(7043): [104] Prasad Raghavendra. Optimal algorithms and 759–764, 2005. DOI: 10.1038/nature03602. inapproximability results for every CSP? In [115] Don Coppersmith, David Gamarnik, Mo- *Proceedings of the fortieth annual ACM sympo-* hammad T. Hajiaghayi, and Gregory B. *sium on Theory of computing*, pages 245–254, Sorkin. Random MAX SAT, random MAX
1. DOI: 10.1145/1374376.1374414.

CUT, and their phase transitions. *Random* [105] Prasad Raghavendra and David Steurer. How *Struct. Algorithms*, 24(4):502–545, 2004. DOI: to round any CSP. In *2009 50th Annual* 10.1002/rsa.20015. *IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Com- puter Science*, pages 586–594, 2009. DOI: 10.1109/FOCS.2009.74. [106] Subhash Khot, Dor Minzer, and Muli Safra. Pseudorandom sets in grassmann graph have near-perfect expansion. In *Proceedings of the ﬁfty-ninth Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS)*, pages 592–601,
1. DOI: 10.1109/FOCS.2018.00062.

[107] Boaz Barak, Prasad Raghavendra, and David Steurer. Rounding semideﬁnite programming hierarchies via global correlation. In *Proceedings of the ﬁftysecond annual symposium on founda- tions of computer science*, pages 472–481. IEEE,
1. DOI: 10.1109/FOCS.2011.95.

[108] Samuel B. Hopkins, Tselil Schramm, and Luca Trevisan. Subexponential LPs approximate max-cut. In *Proceedings of the sixtyﬁrst Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-* Accepted in Quantum 2021-06-15, click title to verify. Published under CC-BY 4.0. 20
