# colucci-2023-power

Received 1 August 2023, accepted 26 August 2023, date of publication 11 September 2023, date of current version 15 September 2023. *Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3312997*

## Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach

GIUSEPPE COLUCCI1, STAN VAN DER LINDE 2, AND FRANK PHILLIPSON 2,3 1Quantum Quants, 3035 AW Rotterdam, The Netherlands 2Applied Cryptography & Quantum Algorithms, TNO, 2595 DA The Hague, The Netherlands 3School of Business and Economics, Maastricht University, 6211 LM Maastricht, The Netherlands Corresponding author: Stan van der Linde (stan.vanderlinde@tno.nl) This work was supported by Stichting Quantum Delta NL. **ABSTRACT** Optimization of electricity surplus is a crucial element for transmission power networks since it leads to reducing costs as well as increasing efficiency across the network as a whole. In this paper, we show how to optimize such network costs using a quantum annealing approach. First, we define the Quadratic Unconstrained Binary Optimization (QUBO) problem for network partitioning. To achieve this, we introduce a method to translate inequality constraints with real-valued coefficients into approximate penalty functions. Next, we test the implementation on purely quantum and quantum-classical hybrid architectures. We then solve the problem using the D-Wave hybrid Constrained Quadratic Model (CQM) solver, the D-Wave hybrid Binary Quadratic Model (BQM) solver, as well as classical solvers available on Azure Quantum Cloud. Finally, we find that the value of the objective function obtained with the quantum-classical hybrid solvers is always lower compared to the classical approaches across a range of different problem sizes. This demonstrates that the quantum-classical hybrid methods outperform the classical methods in terms of solution quality. **INDEX TERMS** Optimization, power networks, quantum annealing, quantum classical hybrid solver, quantum computing, QUBO. [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11], [12]. Graph theory has been **I. INTRODUCTION** In recent years, the energy sector has witnessed a global proposed as an efficient methodology to identify the optimal shift toward clean energy, with companies around the world design of electricity networks [5], [6], [7]. Recent advances accelerating ambitious renewable energy goals, particularly in both quantum hardware and algorithm development have in wind and solar power. As a result, the energy market made it possible to solve problems that can be mapped onto is gradually transitioning from centrally planned, financed, graphs on quantum computers. More generally, quantum and operated electricity systems to a more decentralized and computers can efficiently solve combinatorial optimization real-time model. This shift involves the sharing of planning, problems, including NP-hard problems, for which efficient finance, and operation responsibilities among an increasing classical algorithms are unknown [13], [14], [15], [16]. number of parties. While decentralization brings benefits The main goal of this paper is to demonstrate the current such as improved utilization of renewable energy sources, performance of one of the most promising quantum opti- reduced fossil fuel use, and increased eco-efficiency [1], mization approaches: quantum annealing. For this, we apply it also increases the complexity of electricity systems. quantum annealing to the power network optimization Optimizing costs and operations of the entire network problem of the energy industry. To our knowledge, this becomes increasingly challenging due to the growing number approach has not yet been applied to a large-scale problem of energy players and the complex nature of the underlying in the energy field. This study therefore also serves as proof- power network. of-concept for the use of quantum annealing for the power Several methods have been implemented to enhance the network optimization problem. efficiency and resilience of power networks [2], [3], [4], [5], Apart from the significance of addressing an industry use case with quantum annealing, we also contribute to the theoretical aspect by improving the current approach to The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and treating inequality constraints and QUBO penalty functions. approving it for publication was Md. Abdur Razzaque . This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ 98926 VOLUME 11, 2023

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach Specifically, we introduce a method to easily translate an formulation is easily transformed to describe a Hamiltonian. inequality constraint with real-valued coefficients into an Most software suites which control quantum annealing hard- approximate penalty function for the quantum annealing ware can use the QUBO formulation directly as input [21]. The QUBO formulation has the following form: Hamiltonian. This is a major result, as it is relevant for many use cases where the coefficients of the inequality constraints ***x***∈{0*,*1}*n* ***x***⊺*Q****x****,* min (1) are not integer values (e.g., inventory management to reflect the physical storage capacity of a warehouse or the cost of where Q is a real valued matrix and ***x*** of length *n* and its storing inventory; resource allocation to reflect availability transpose ***x***⊺are binary vectors. and costs of resources; machine scheduling to reflect capacity Most problems are not naturally expressed in the QUBO and efficiency of the machines). formulation, which requires the recasting of the problem. This article is structured as follows. In Section II, we give Many problems have already been reformulated into the a summary of the quantum annealing paradigm and outline QUBO form [20]. For those problems that are not yet in such the mathematical framework underlying the optimization a list, techniques have been distilled to rewrite combinatorial problem we aim to solve. Then, in Section III, we define optimization problems into the QUBO form [22]. The the power network optimization problem, with and without specific techniques used in this paper are: (A) including electricity sharing among nodes of the network. We adopt equality constraints, (B) including inequality constraints and the graph partitioning problem formulation presented in [7]. (C) pairwise degree reduction. In this problem formulation, a graph partitioning approach is used to construct minimal cost microgrids (partitions) for *A. INCLUDING EQUALITY CONSTRAINTS* sharing electricity surplus within a power grid. In Section IV, The QUBO formulation does not allow for any constraints. we express the problem in the QUBO formulation, which will Nonetheless, many real world problems contain (in)equality be used in the actual implementation and run on the quantum, constraints. These constraints are included into the objective classical and hybrid solvers. In Section V, we present the function by means of a penalty function [22]. A penalty results of our graph partitioning model and implementation function for a constraint should be zero when the constraint with synthetic datasets on quantum and hybrid implemen- is met and positive otherwise. tations. Next, we show results of hybrid and classical Let us construct such a penalty function for a general linear approaches to an industrially relevant problem, by optimizing equality constraint as shown in (2) the electricity surplus of the transmission power network of ***a***⊺***x*** = *b,* Germany. Finally, in Section VI, we summarize our findings (2) and outline possible future developments. where ***a*** is a real constant vector and *b* is a real constant. If we take the left-hand side, subtract *b* from it and square it we get **II. QUBO FORMULATION AND MATHEMATICAL** the following penalty function *P*(***x***): **TOOLBOX** 2 *.* The Adiabatic Quantum Optimization (AQO) model is a ***a***⊺***x*** −*b P*(***x***) = (3) quantum computing model used to find solutions to combina- Note that *P*(***x***) is non-negative and that it is zero if and only torial optimization problems. AQO utilizes the adiabatic the- if the constraint from (2) is met. Therefore, the addition of orem in quantum mechanics [17], [18] to adiabatically move this function to the objective function will favour solutions towards the ground state of an interaction Hamiltonian, onto that comply with the constraints in (2) (when assuming which an optimization problem is mapped. The hardware minimization). architecture that approximately implements the adiabatic quantum computer paradigm is the quantum annealer [19]. *B. INCLUDING INEQUALITY CONSTRAINTS* Unlike a quantum gate architecture, where a computation Including inequality constraints into the objective function is defined by applying separate gates (operators) to each requires more work compared to equality constraints. A gen- qubit, a quantum annealer defines a Hamiltonian operator eral linear inequality constraint has the following form: that acts simultaneously on all qubits in the ground state. This operator adiabatically changes towards a Hamiltonian ***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b.* (4) on which the cost function of a specific optimization problem is mapped [20]. Theoretically, the resulting state after the If ***a*** and *b* are integer valued, then this equation is adiabatic evolution will be the ground state of the final equivalent to an equality constraint with the inclusion of slack Hamiltonian, i.e., the global minimum of the optimization variables [22]. Subsequently, the latter equality constraint problem mapped onto the final Hamiltonian. could then be included into the objective function with the In order to solve combinatorial optimization problems with penalty function shown in the previous section. quantum annealing hardware, one must map the cost function However, in many real life problems (including the one of the optimization problem to a Hamiltonian. The most proposed in this paper), ***a*** and *b* in (4) are real valued. common way to do this, is to use the Quadratic Unconstrained In this case we cannot transform the inequality constraint Binary Optimization (QUBO) formulation [21]. The QUBO to an equality constraint. Instead we directly construct VOLUME 11, 2023 98927

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach an (approximate) penalty function from the inequality function. We will analyse this behaviour using the following constraint. We start by finding a (possible negative) lower proposition. bound of the left hand side *c* ∈R: R*n*+1 *Proposition 3: Let* (***a****, b*) ∈ *define the set F* = {***x*** ∈{0*,* 1}*n* | ***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b*}*. Define c* := min *F (a lower c* ≤***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b,* (5) *bound of the constraint) and* where R is the set of real numbers. In general, *c* can be easily !2 *K*−1 *αK*(***a***⊺***x*** −*c*) − computed. If ***a*** contains at least one negative element, then *c* X 2*izi P*(***x****,* ***z***) = *,* is the sum of all negative elements of ***a***, otherwise it is 0. *i*=0 One approach to create a penalty function for (5) is to *where K* ∈N*,* ***z*** ∈{0*,* 1}*K and αK* = (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*)*.* approximate (5) using *K* auxiliary binary variables *zi*. The *Then for x /*∈*F,* resulting penalty function of such an approach is *z*∈{0*,*1}*K P*(***x****,* ***z***) = 1 !2 4 + *αkε* + (*αkε*)2*,* 2*K* −1 *K*−1 min ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* 2 X 2*izi P*(***x****,* ***z***) = − *,* (6) *b* −*c where ε* = ***a***⊺***x*** −*b. i*=0 *P*(***x****,* ***z***) with *αK* = (2*K* −1*/*2)(*/*(*b* −*c*) scales quadratically of which the derivation can be found in Appendix A. The goal of this penalty function is to favour values of ***x*** ∈{0*,* 1}*n* that in both *αK* and the amount of violation. Because *αK* scales exponentially in *K*, the sensitivity of the penalty comply with (4), as opposed to values of ***x*** that violate the function scales exponentially in *K*. The sensitivity of constraint. the penalty function can be increased by increasing *K*. However, one must be wary to set *K* to large values when
1. PROPERTIES AND ANALYSIS OF THE APPROXIMATE

implementing these penalties. Since *αK* scales exponentially PENALTY FUNCTION in *K*, the penalty can become numerically unstable for large To our knowledge, the penalty function shown in (6) is a new values of *K*. result. Therefore, we analyse some of its properties in the form of mathematical theorems and propositions. The proofs *C. DEGREE REDUCTION* of the theorems and propositions can be found in Appendix A. In the QUBO formulation only quadratic or lower order terms We start by showing that the penalty function can distinguish are allowed. However, often problem formulations contain between values of ***x*** that meet the constraint and that violate higher order terms. These higher order terms can be reduced the constraint. R*n*+1 *and define the set* to quadratic terms by adding auxiliary binary variables. With *Theorem 1: Let* (***a****, b*) ∈ *F* = {***x*** ∈{0*,* 1}*n* | ***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b*}*. Let c* = min *F be a lower* pairwise degree reduction, we substitute a quadratic *xixj* term *bound of* ***a***⊺***x*** *and* by a new variable *z* and we add the following penalty function to the objective !2 2*K* −1 *K*−1 ***a***⊺***x*** −*c M*(*xi, xj, z*) = *xixj* −2*z*(*xi* + *xj*) + 3*z.* (7) 2 X 2*izi P*(***x****,* ***z***) = − *, b* −*c i*=0 Note that *M*(*xi, xj, z*) is non-negative and *M*(*xi, xj, z*) = 0 if *where K* ∈N *and* ***z*** ∈{0*,* 1}*K. Then, for* ***x*** ∈{0*,* 1}*n the* and only if *xixj* = *z*. So for example *x*1*x*2*x*3 would become *x*1*z* + *λM*(*x*2*, x*3*, z*), where *λ >* 0 is a Lagrange multiplier. *following statements are equivalent*:
1. ***x*** ∈*F.*
2. *There exists a* ***z*** ∈{0*,* 1}*K such that P*(***x****,* ***z***) ≤1*/*4*.*

**III. GRAPH PARTITIONING PROBLEM FOR POWER GRIDS** Graph Partitioning (GP) is the determination of commu- For a fixed ***x*** we have that if ***x*** meets the constraint, then the nities or clusters, within the nodes of a graph. GP has minimum of the penalty function is between 0 and 1*/*4. On the proven to be a useful method in network analysis [23]. other hand, if ***x*** violates the constraint, then the minimum of In fact, GP approaches emerged to reduce the complexity the penalty function is strictly larger then 1*/*4. of applications generally involving graph sizes arbitrarily In the following proposition we shall show that large compared to the computational resources at hand, this property is a direct consequence of the constant (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*) in the definition of the penalty function. by dividing (*partitioning*) the graph into smaller sub- graphs or sub-problems, and thus increase the computational *Proposition 2: Let a, b, c and F be the same as defined αK*(***a***⊺***x*** −*c*) −*z* 2*,* performance [24]. *in Theorem 1. Suppose P*(***x****, z*) = *where z* ∈{0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1}*. Then the following statements* Applications of GP include physical network design [25], VLSI design [26], telecommunication network design [27], *are equivalent*:
1. ***x*** ∈*F.*

load balancing of high performance computing (HPC)
1. *There exists a z such that P*(***x****, z*) ≤1*/*4*.*

codes [28], distributed sparse matrix-vector multiplica- *if and only if αK* = (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*)*.* tion [29], biological [30] and social networks [31], [32]. GP is an NP-hard problem (as a decision problem) [33], Another important property of this penalty function is the relative size of the penalty that is given by the penalty [34]. Algorithms to solve GP problems include exact 98928 VOLUME 11, 2023

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach algorithms, spectral partitioning, geometric partitioning, flow of a cluster is below the threshold *k*, so that the partition computations, etc. [35]. Exact algorithms are often used to fulfills the *self-sufficiency* property. solve small-size problems, whereas heuristic algorithms are needed for larger problems. *B. MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION WITH* Recently, quantum computers have been used to model and *ELECTRICITY SHARING* solve the graph partitioning problem, see e.g., [36], [37], [38], The mathematical formulation of the problem with electricity and [39]. In this paper, we shall focus on solving the graph sharing is very similar to the problem outlined in the partitioning of a power network with quantum annealing, previous section. Both the objective function and one- which uses quantum physics to find low-energy states of a hot constraint remain the same. The key difference is the problem and which can be mapped to the optimal or near- balancing constraint, which now allows for sharing of energy optimal solution of the optimization problem. surplus. This is done by adding a flow function between each In the following we outline the mathematical formulation partition *Fpq*(***v***), such that *Fpq*(***v***) = −*Fqp*(***v***). The resulting of the graph partitioning problem for a power grid, in which mathematical formulation is given by the performance metric is given by the *power grid cost*. !2   *P N* We follow the formulation presented in [7], where minimal X X + *β* |*E*| − X min *α vnp vnpvmp* cost microgrids (partitions) are used to efficiently share  ***v***∈B*PN p*=1 *n*=1 {*n,m*}∈*E* electricity surplus. We first consider the case of no electricity (11) sharing within partitions and then extend this formulation to allow for electricity sharing. Finally, we shall express *P* X *vnp* = 1*, n* = 1*, . . . , N* the graph partitioning problem in the Hamiltonian/QUBO s.t. (12) framework needed to implement and solve the problem on *p*=1 a quantum annealer. *N P N* X X X *vnpwn* + *Fpq*(***v***) −*k vnp* ≤0*, A. MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION WITHOUT n*=1 *q*=1 *n*=1 *ELECTRICITY SHARING p* = 1*, . . . , P.* (13) In [7], the graph partition of power grids is modeled in the following manner. Suppose we have a graph *G* = (*V, E*), **IV. QUBO FORMULATION OF GRAPH PARTITIONING** where the vertices *V* represent geographical areas and the The optimization problem described in Section III contains edges *E* represent transmission lines between two areas. The constraints, which are not allowed in the QUBO formulation. total electricity surplus in an area is then encoded in the To overcome this, constraints will be included into the weight of the vertices associated to the given area. objective function with the use of penalty terms to produce Let *P* be the number of partitions, or clusters, and the following form: *N* = |*V*| be the number of vertices in the graph. Then the binary variable *vnp* ∈B is 1 when vertex *n* is in partition *p* #constraints X min *H*(***x***) + *λiPi*(***x***)*.* (14) and 0 otherwise. Let *k* denote the threshold of self-sufficiency ∈R+ *i*=1 of the partition, as defined in [7]. Suppose *α, β* are coefficients of the cost for transmission lines within a We will first show the QUBO formulation of the GP single cluster and between clusters respectively. Then the problem *without* electricity sharing, followed by the QUBO optimization problem can be written as: formulation of the GP problem *with* electricity sharing. !2   *P N A. QUBO FORMULATION OF GRAPH PARTITIONING* X X X *α* + *β* |*E*| − min *vnp vnpvmp* (8) *WITHOUT ELECTRICITY SHARING **v***∈B*PN p*=1 *n*=1 {*n,m*}∈*E* First, we derive the Hamiltonian for the objective function. *P* The objective function shown in (8) consists of binary X s.t. *vnp* = 1*, n* = 1*, . . . , N* (9) variables and is quadratic in nature. Hence, this objective *p*=1 function already complies with QUBO formalism and its *N N* Hamiltonian is given by X X *vnpwn* −*k vnp* ≤0*, p* = 1*, . . . , P.* (10) !2   *P N n*=1 *n*=1 *H*(***v***) = X X + *β* |*E*| − X *α vnp vnpvmp* *.* Equation (8) is the objective function of the optimization *p*=1 *n*=1 (*n,m*)∈*E* problem, which represent the cost of constructing a particular (15) partition. The constraints described in (9) are called one-hot constraints. These constraints enforce each vertex to be in one Secondly, we will derive a penalty function for the and one only cluster. Lastly, the constraints in (10) are called one-hot constraints shown in (9). Since these are linear balancing constraints. These ensure that the average surplus equality constraints, we can use the technique described in VOLUME 11, 2023 98929

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach Subsection II-A to produce Note that *F* is indeed a flow, since X 2 *Fqp*(***v****,* ***f*** ) = *wnm*(*fnmq* −*fnmp*)(*vnqvmp* + *vmqvnp*)   *N P* X X *P*oh(***v***) = *vnp* −1 *.* (16) {*n,m*}∈*E*   *n*=1 *p*=1 = − X *wnm*(*fnmp* −*fnmq*)(*vnpvmq* + *vmpvnq*) {*n,m*}∈*E* Lastly, we will derive a penalty function for the balancing = −*Fpq*(***v****,* ***f*** )*.* constraint shown in (10). To do so, we will use the technique (21) described in Subsection II-B for which we will need a lower Therefore, we also have the property *Fpp*(***v****,* ***f*** ) = 0. bound on the constraint. A lower bound can be found by If we include *F* from (20) into the balancing constraint, taking the summation over all negative *wn* −*k* values, i.e., the constraint becomes cubic in nature. Hence, we will *N* have to reduce the degree of this constraint by using the *c* = 1 X *(wn* −*k* −|*wn* −*k*|*) .* (17) technique described in Subsection II-C. Let *P* = {(*p, q*) ∈ 2 *n*=1 {1*, . . . , P*}2|*p*̸ = *q*}, then we reduce the degree by adding This lower bound *c* and the upper bound of 0 produces the auxiliary binary variables with the following properties following penalty function: *anmpq* = *vnpvmq,* ∀{*n, m*} ∈*E,* ∀(*p, q*) ∈*P,*
1. *ynmpq* = *fnmpanmpq,*

*P*bc(***v****,* ***x***; *K*) ∀{*n, m*} ∈*E,* ∀(*p, q*) ∈*P,*
1. *znmpq* = *fnmpanmqp,*

2*K* −1 *K*−1 *P N* ! 2 ∀{*n, m*} ∈*E,* ∀(*p, q*) ∈*P.* (24) = X 2 −*c* + X *vnp*(*wn* −*k*) − X 2*axap ,* −*c* Hence, *Fqp*(***v****,* ***f*** ) becomes *p*=1 *n*=1 *a*=0 (18) X *Fpq*(***v****,* ***f*** ) = *wnm*(*fnmp* −*fnmq*)(*vnpvmq* + *vmpvnq*) {*n,m*}∈*E* where *xap* are the auxiliary (slack) variables. X The final QUBO Hamiltonian representation of the whole = *wnm*(*fnmp* −*fnmq*)(*anmpq* + *anmqp*) problem is then {*n,m*}∈*E* = X *wnm*(*ynmpq* + *znmpq* −*ynmqp* −*znmqp*) (***v****,****x***)∈B*PN* ×B*PK H*(***v***) + *λ*oh*P*oh(***v***) + *λ*bc*P*bc(***v****,* ***x***; *K*)*,* min (19) {*n,m*}∈*E* where *λ*oh and *λ*bc are non-negative constants (Lagrange = *Gpq*(***y****,* ***z***) (25) multipliers) and *K* is a positive integer. The penalty function of the balancing constraint with From (19), it is evident that the number of variables for the electricity sharing is then given by problem with *N* nodes, *P* partitions and the hyperparameter 2*K* −1 *K* is *P*(*N* + *K*). *P N* X 2 X *P*bc(***v****,* ***x****,* ***y****,* ***z***) = *c* + *vnp*(*wn* −*k*) *c p*=1 *n*=1 *B. QUBO FORMULATION OF GRAPH PARTITIONING WITH P K*−1 *ELECTRICITY SHARING* 2 X X + *Gqp*(***y****,* ***z***) − 2*axap ,* (26) The mathematical formulation of the GP problem with shar- *q*=1 *a*=0 ing has the same objective function and one-hot constraints. *q*̸=*p* Therefore, we will use the same objective Hamiltonian and where *c* = 1 P*N n*=1 *(*|*wn* −*k*| −*wn* + *k)* + P penalty function as in the previous section. What remains {*n,m*}∈*E wnm.* 2 is constructing a penalty for the new balancing constraint. Lastly, we apply the penalty function for degree reduction However, as will become clear, this altered balancing as described in Subsection II-C to imply the required behaviour of the auxiliary variables: Hamiltonian will need new auxiliary variables for which the behaviour will be enforced by an additional constraint. X X *Paux*(***v****,* ***f*** *,* ***y****,* ***z****,* ***a***) = *M*(*vnp, vmq, anmpq*) Let us start by defining a flow from partition *p* to partition {*n,m*}∈*E p,q*∈*P q*. We will construct a flow which can share everything from + *M*(*fnmp, anmpq, ynmpq*) *p* to *q*, everything from *q* to *p* or nothing at all. This flow function has the following form: + *M*(*fnmp, anmqp, znmpq*)*.* (27) X *Fpq*(***v****,* ***f*** ) = *wnm*(*fnmp* −*fnmq*)(*vnpvmq* + *vmpvnq*)*,* With the new penalty terms, the QUBO problem for graph partitioning with electricity sharing is given by: {*n,m*}∈*E* (20) ***v****,****x****,****f*** *,****y****,****z****,****a*** *H*(***v***) + *λ*oh*P*oh(***v***) + *λ*bc*P*bc(***v****,* ***x****,* ***y****,* ***z***; *K*) min where *fnmp* are new binary variables determining the flow + *λ*aux*Paux*(***v****,* ***f*** *,* ***y****,* ***z****,* ***a***)*.* (28) between partition *p* and *q*. Note that *vnpvmq* + *vmpvnq* in (20) is 1 if {*n, m*} is an edge between partition *p* and *q* and is zero The total number of variables of the QUBO formulation otherwise. is less straightforward compared to the model without 98930 VOLUME 11, 2023

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach electricity sharing. We shall analyse this by counting the size We solved the QUBO with a pure quantum annealing of all the binary vectors ***v****,* ***x****,* ***f*** *,* ***y****,* ***z*** and ***a***. The size of ***v*** and approach, using the D-Wave Advantage system. The QUBO ***x*** is the same as for the problem without sharing, *PN* and and CQM formulation were solved using the BQM and *PK* respectively. For each edge there is a *f* variable for each CQM solver from D-Wave’s Leap hybrid solver service partition, hence the size of ***f*** is *P*|*E*|. Lastly, the size of ***a***, ***y*** respectively. Note that the hybrid solvers use the D-Wave and ***z*** is given by *P*, which is |*E*|(*P*2 −1). Therefore, the total Advantage system as a back-end. An overview of the number of variables for the QUBO with electricity sharing is parameters used for all solvers can be found in Appendix B. *P*(*N* + *K* + |*E*|) + 3|*E*|(*P*2 −1). Hence, when the network graph is not sparse, the number of variables is much larger for **V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION** the model with sharing. In the preceding sections we have presented a method to construct QUBO penalty terms for real-valued linear inequality constraints. A noteworthy feature of this penalty *C. QUBO HYPERPARAMETERS* term, is that we can freely choose the number of auxiliary In the construction of the QUBO in the previous sections, variables *K*. Moreover, we show that the sensitivity scales the hyperparameters *K* and *λi* were introduced. These exponentially in the number of auxiliary variables *K*. Due hyperparameters should be determined before solving the to the rapid scaling of the sensitivity, only a small amount problem and comparing results. The *K* parameter has been of auxiliary variables is needed. This is a desirable property discussed before in Section (II-B) and can be used to alter the for quantum annealing, as the number of qubits is limited. sensitivity of the balancing constraint. Furthermore, we applied this penalty term construction The other hyperparameters, *λi*, were determined with a method to obtain QUBOs for a power network optimisation grid-search. In this grid-search each grid point was evaluated problem with and without electricity sharing. Just like the using short runs of simulated annealing. For each grid point, penalty term construction method, the QUBOs that we two measures of quality were calculated: (i) the original presented in the preceding section are novel and can be objective value of (8) and (ii) the number of constraints used for further research. In what follows, we present the violated. The best grid point had the lowest objective numerical results of the different solvers for the power value for which no constraints were violated. To minimize network optimization problem without electricity sharing. computation time, we performed the grid-search in two This serves as a proof-of-concept of our QUBO, showing that stages: (i) a logarithmic stage and (ii) a linear stage. In the these theoretical results can aid in the solution for relevant logarithmic stage a logarithmic grid was searched quickly to determine the order of magnitude of each *λi*. Next, a linear real-life problems such as power network optimization. We tested the performance of the pure quantum and hybrid grid was searched to more precisely determine the best solvers of D-Wave and compared them with the performance value of *λi*. Using this method we quickly found suitable of the classical solvers of the Microsoft Quantum-inspired hyperparameters *λi*. optimization (QIO) provider2 present on the Azure cloud. In (A) we explain how we tested the equivalence between the *D. IMPLEMENTATION ON D-WAVE ARCHITECTURE* implementations of the CQM and BQM, which justifies the The initial formulation of the power network optimization comparison between the hybrid and classical solvers in (C). problem, as presented in this paper, was a constrained In (B) we show that the QUBO formulation (or BQM) can be quadratic model (CQM). CQMs cannot be solved using a solved with a pure quantum annealer. For this purpose, we use quantum annealer. We therefore reformulated the problem a small synthetic data set with a known optimum. into a QUBO formulation, also known as a binary quadratic model (BQM). Although CQMs can currently not be solved *A. TESTING CQM AND BQM IMPLEMENTATIONS* with pure quantum approaches, they can be solved with To gain confidence in both our implementation and derivation hybrid approaches. Hybrid approaches solve the problem by of the CQM and BQM models, they were first tested on using a combination of classical and quantum computation. smaller problems. For this purpose, we designed two tests. To test the performance of current quantum annealing Firstly, the implementation was tested by constructing a paradigms, the problem formulations were submitted to the square graph with known weights. Due to the problem size, D-Wave quantum computing system which offers both hybrid it was possible to manually write out both the CQM and and pure quantum annealing solvers. The D-Wave quantum computing system1 is a hardware BQM models. These models were then compared to the CQM and BQM models implemented in our system, and they heuristic that minimizes Ising objective functions using a were found to be equal. Thus, we gained confidence in the physically realized version of quantum annealing. Due to implementation of our model. the mapping between QUBO and Ising variables [20], every Secondly, the equality of the optimal points of the CQM QUBO problem can be translated to an Ising model which and BQM in practice was tested. In theory, the optimal can then be embedded onto a D-Wave system. 2https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/quantum/provider-microsoft- 1https://www.dwavesys.com/ qio VOLUME 11, 2023 98931

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach **FIGURE 1.** (a) Shape of the graphs used for the QPU results. (b) On the left axis the E2E time versus clique size. The right axis shows the embedding size (in qubits) versus clique size. point of the CQM and BQM should yield the same value present analysis lies in proving the concept of the model on when plugged into the original objective function shown the quantum annealer, the specific values of these parameters in (8). We tested this using brute force algorithms. The are irrelevant. Thus, we choose *α* and *β* to be respectively original objective function was tested for 100 randomly 1 and 10. The threshold *k* was set to 0*.*5. generated graphs with 2 to 8 nodes. All 700 tested problems The problem was directly tested on the D-Wave Advantage yielded a solution with an equal objective value for both system. The annealing time was set to 1000 *µ*s, and the BQM and CQM. Consequently, we gained confidence in the number of reads was set to 500. All other settings were left at equivalence of the optimal points for the BQM and CQM. their defaults. The problem was tested for clique sizes ranging from 3 to 53, beyond which no minor embedding could be found. The quantum annealer found the optimal solution in *B. QUANTUM ANNEALING ON A SYNTHETIC DATASET all* instances at least once. The results are shown in Fig. 1b. The performance of the BQM using quantum annealing Fig. 1b shows the end-to-end time of solving the problem was tested on the D-Wave Advantage quantum annealer. on the left axis. Since the actual time spent on the quantum To assess performance, a synthetic dataset was created. The annealer was the same for all these problems, almost all of this use of a synthetic dataset is necessary in quantum computing time was spent on finding an appropriate minor embedding. benchmarking to ensure the validity of the algorithms The embedding size is shown on the right axis as a function of used [40], [41], [42], [43], [44]. clique size. Interestingly, no minor embedding could be found The dataset was created by connecting two cliques with for a clique size larger than 53. This outcome was unexpected, a single edge (see Fig. 1a). This configuration generates a considering that the minor embedding was achieved for a graph with two clearly defined partitions (the two cliques). clique size of 3974, while the D-Wave Advantage system Next, a surplus was added to nodes in the graph. The surplus has 5640 qubits. This limitation in the quantum annealing possesses two key properties: (i) the average surplus in implementation demonstrates the challenge of estimating the each clique is 0*.*45 and (ii) more than 1/3 of all possible scalability of the problem size with the number of qubits in partitions violate the balancing constraint with a threshold the quantum annealing architecture. *k* = 0*.*5. Property (i) ensures that the balancing constraint is not violated when the two cliques are selected as partitions, *C. GERMAN TRANSMISSION POWER NETWORK DATA SET* while property (ii) ensures that combinations of variables Next we performed a benchmarking analysis on a large size exist where the balancing constraint can be violated. energy network. For this analysis, we considered the trans- The chosen dataset has two key advantages: it has a mission power data obtained with the open-source reference variable size, and the optimum solution is known beforehand. model of European transmission networks, SciGRID [45], Hence, we can easily verify if the solver correctly finds which is based on the raw transmission data available in the global optimum for different problem sizes. In [7], openstreetmap.org.3 two different sets of cost parameters are considered, (*α, β*) = (1*,* 1) and (*α, β*) = (1*,* 10). Since the focus of the 3OpenStreetMap: https://www.openstreetmap.org/ 98932 VOLUME 11, 2023

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach **TABLE 1.** Hyperparameters for the QUBO of the German network for different partition sizes *P*, where ***α*** **=** 1, ***β*** **=** 10, *k* **=** 0***.***5 and *K* **=** 10. **TABLE 2.** Objective function value for the German power network for diferent number of partitions *P*. Each partition was solved with D-Waves Constrained Quadtaric Model Solver (CQM) and Binary Quadratic Model Solver (BQM), as well as Azures Parallel Tempering (PT), Simulated Annealing (SA), Substochastic Monte Carlo (MC) and Tabu Search (TS). Each solver has a time limit of 10 seconds. Finally, the electricity surplus at each node (i.e., the weight of the node) is drawn from a uniform [0*,* 1) distribution. In fact, an estimation of a realistic electricity surplus is out of scope for this paper and does not add value to the benchmark, as it would only influence the choice of the hyperparameters and the value of the objective function. In our test data, the average surplus across all nodes was **FIGURE 2.** Graph derived from the SciGRID German transmission power approximately 0*.*49. In order to make the problem sufficiently network. difficult, the threshold was set to *k* = 0*.*5. Table 1 shows the hyperparameters obtained with the grid- In particular, we performed the analysis on the SciGRID search algorithm outlined in Subsection IV-C for the case of the German transmission power network. *K* = 10 was model output tables with vertices and links obtained from running the model on Germany raw data. The SciGRID chosen, because it was found to be sufficiently large to detect output tables are: the table *vertices*, which contains the geo- small errors in the balancing constraint, whilst being small graphical center positions of German electrical substations, enough to be safe in terms of overflow values. We defined together with information on voltage level, frequency, name eight different graph partitioning problems, corresponding and operator; the table *links*, which contains the connections to different number of partitions (2 to 9) and calculated between two substations, with information on properties of the hyperparameters for each of these problems. Note that the transmission line, e.g., voltage, number of cables in the the higher the number of partitions, the higher the number circuit, resistance, and maximum current. of variables involved becomes, which also drives up the Given their structure, the SciGRID output tables can be computational time. used to build the graph of the German transmission power Table 2 and Fig. 3 shows the comparison of the minimum of network (Fig. 2) and define the mapping to the problem in (8- the objective function found by different solvers used to solve
1. and (11-13), where the table *vertices* is used to define the

the graph partitioning problem on the German transmission nodes and the table *links* defines the edges of the transmission power network. network. For this comparison we first ran the problem on the CQM Additionally, for the complete definition of the optimiza- and BQM hybrid solvers. Then, we implemented the same tion problem, we need to choose the values of the cost binary quadratic problem in the Microsoft QIO framework parameters *α* and *β*, and the electricity surplus at each node. and solved it by means of Parallel Tempering (PT), Simulated These parameters are not defined or available in the SciGRID Annealing (SA), Substochastic Monte Carlo (MC) and Tabu data set. In [7] two different sets of cost parameters are Search (TS). Parallel Tempering and Simulated Annealing considered, (*α, β*) = (1*,* 1) and (*α, β*) = (1*,* 10). Since map the problem onto a thermodynamic system and search the focus of the present analysis is a benchmark of the for the optimum by exchanging configurations at different quantum optimization approaches, the specific value of these temperatures. Substochastic Monte Carlo is a diffusion parameters is not relevant. Thus, for the sake of the analysis, Monte Carlo algorithm inspired by adiabatic quantum we choose *α* and *β* to be respectively 1 and 10. computation. Tabu Search is a metaheuristic optimization VOLUME 11, 2023 98933

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach Clearly the BQM and CQM implementations outperform the quantum-inspired methods in terms of quality. For all numbers of partitions, the CQM provides the lowest objective value. Additionally, all quantum-inspired methods show a deterioration in the quality of the solution for large number of partitions. This is clearly visible in the behavior of the objective function value for different partition sizes shown in Fig. 3. In fact, the value of the objective function at the minimum for the classical solvers shows a large variability across different partition sizes, compared to the hybrid solvers (CQM and BQM). For PT, SA, MC and TS the objective function explodes for partition sizes larger than 5. This is probably due to the fact that hybrid solvers can handle a larger number of variables and constraints. Fig. 4 shows an example of solution obtained with the Hybrid CQM sampler for *P* = 6 partitions. Note that some **FIGURE 3.** Change in objective function value for different solvers. clusters include points that are far from each other. This is the result of the simplification that the edge cost, *β* in (8), is a constant. A possible improvement of this assumption would be to define *β* as a function of the geographical distance between nodes. **VI. CONCLUSION** In this paper, we demonstrated how to optimize the costs of constructing an energy network with microgrids (partitions) for sharing energy surplus using quantum annealing. While previous studies have focused on utilizing quantum annealing to solve various optimization problems, this paper stands out by addressing a crucial use case in the energy sector: power network optimization. The proposed method for encoding the problem into a QUBO formulation is novel and provides a way to handle complex optimization problems that involve linear and nonlinear constraints with real-valued coefficients. Following the approach presented in [7], we first mapped the optimization problem to a graph partitioning problem, where the objective is to determine the optimal set of communities of power substations. The problem was mathe- matically defined as a QUBO problem, both with and without electricity sharing among the network nodes. Additionally, we introduced a grid-search approach to determine the optimal hyperparameters for the optimization problem. The model and implementation for the case of no-electricity sharing were tested on both a real quantum annealer and hybrid solvers. The tests were conducted on small-sized **FIGURE 4.** Best solution found by the Hybrid CQM Sampler (Number of random graphs, and the results were verified using an partitions [P] is 6). exhaustive search algorithm (exact solution). For the numerical results, we considered a real-sized prob- approach based on a local search method, which looks at lem using data from the German transmission power network. neighboring configurations to move across the solution space. The optimization problem was implemented for the case of For the sake of a fair comparison, all approaches, hybrid and no-electricity sharing and executed on the D-Wave hybrid quantum-inspired, are run with a time limit of 10 seconds CQM and BQM solvers. The quantum solver results were all other settings were left at their defaults. Table 2 shows compared to those obtained from classical approaches avail- the objective value of the optimal solution, thus it provides able on Azure, specifically Parallel Tempering, Simulated an estimation of the quality of the solution. The column *P* Annealing, Substochastic Monte Carlo, and Tabu Search indicates the number of partitions in which the network is present in the Microsoft QIO framework. The numerical clustered. results revealed that, given the same computation time, the 98934 VOLUME 11, 2023

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach quantum approaches (CQM and BQM) outperformed the provide the proofs of the theorems and propositions shown classical algorithms in terms of solution quality. The objective in provided Subsection II-B. function value of the *quantum* solutions was consistently lower than that of the classical approaches across a range *A. DERIVATION ON THE APPROXIMATE PENALTY* of problem sizes. Furthermore, the solution quality of the *FUNCTION* classical approaches deteriorated much faster than that of In this section we will focus on the derivation of the the quantum approaches as the problem complexity (number penalty function introduced in Subsection II-B. The goal is of variables) increased. This effect suggests that hybrid- to construct a penalty function that favours values of ***x*** that quantum approaches might be more suitable for representing comply with the constraint and solving large-scale optimization problems. ***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b* (29) *A. FUTURE CHALLENGES* over values of ***x*** that violate the constraint. Let *c* be the tight lower bound of ***a***⊺***x***. Since ***x*** is a binary vector and ***a*** and *b* are The objective of this paper was to present the current potential of quantum optimization in the energy industry and constants, such a *c* always exists. Furthermore, *c* can be easily benchmark the results against existing classical approaches. found. If all values in ***a*** are non-negative, then the minimum of ***a***⊺***x*** is when ***x*** = **0** and therefore *c* = 0. In the case that Further refinements, improvements and extensions of the ***a*** contains negative values, then ***a***⊺***x*** is minimized when ***x*** is problem addressed and of the model used are possible. First, further investigation is required to implement the one for all elements corresponding with negative values in ***a*** QUBO that was formulated for the optimization problem and zero otherwise. In this case we have that *c* is the sum of all with electricity sharing and verify that the computational negative values. Using this lower bound *c* we can write (29) advantage demonstrated in this paper holds for the electricity as sharing problem as well. Additionally, a comparison with *c* ≤***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b.* (30) other classical solvers currently used for real business applications (e.g., Gurobi or COIN-OR Couenne) would Next, we subtract *c* from all sides to produce provide further confidence for the proposed methodology. 0 ≤***a***⊺***x*** −*c* ≤*b* −*c.* Second, from a more technical perspective, the optimiza- (31) tion of hyperparameters can be improved. Alternatives to If ***a***, *b* and *c* are integer valued, one could replace the the grid search algorithms [46], such as random search, inequality constraint with an equality constraint by adding Bayesian Optimization or metaheuristics algorithms (e.g. slack variables, which results in: genetic algorithms) can be tested to improve speed or quality *I*−2 of the solution. 2*izi* + *zI*−1(2*I* −1−*b* + *c*)*, **a***⊺***x*** −*c* = X (32) Finally, it should be noted that other quantum optimization *i*=0 algorithms are available which do not leverage quantum annealing but gate-based quantum computing. Examples of which subsequently produces the following penalty function: these algorithms are VQE [47] and QAOA [48]. However, !2 *I*−2 the performance of these algorithms is limited by the current 2*izi* −*zI*−1(2*I* −1−*b* + *c*) ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* − X *P*int(***x****,* ***z***) = *.* state of quantum hardware [49] and only small size problems *i*=0 can be solved with these methods. Nevertheless, due to (33) the continuous development and breakthroughs in quantum hardware we believe it is important to regularly monitor the However, when ***a***, *b* or *c* are arbitrary non integer values, maximum size of the problem that can be solved with gate- there can be ***x*** that comply with the constraint for which (33) does not hold for any ***z***. For example, any ***a****T* ***x*** = *n* − based optimization quantum algorithms. The objective of this paper was to present the current 1*/*2, where *n < b* is an integer, we have that the smallest value of *P*int is 1*/*4. Furthermore, when ***a****T* ***x*** = *b* + 1*/*2, potential of quantum optimization in the energy industry and benchmark the results against existing classical approaches. which clearly violates the constraint, then there exists a ***z***, Given the current geopolitical situation and the associated such that *P*int = 1*/*4. Hence, *P*int cannot differentiate well significance of energy sources, we hope to inspire researchers between values that comply with the constraint and values and companies to validate our findings and test this approach that violate the constraint. Therefore, if ***a***, *b* or *c* are arbitrary on other use cases in the energy sector. real valued constants, then (33) is not a good approximation of the constraint in (29). **APPENDIX A** We can overcome the problem by multiplying both sides by (2*K* −1)*/*(*b* −*c*), where *K* is an integer valued constant, **APPROXIMATE PENALTY FUNCTION FOR INEQUALITY CONSTRAINT** to produce The appendix focuses on the approximate penalty function 0 ≤2*K* −1 ≤2*K* −1 ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* introduced in Subsection II-B. The first section will show how 2 2*. b* −*c* this penalty function was derived. The second section will VOLUME 11, 2023 98935

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach Since ˆ*z* ∈{0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1} we know ˆ*z* ≤2*K* −1, hence The equation above can then be *approximated* with the equality *c*(2*K* −1 ≤*c*(2*K* −1
1. + (2*K* −1

2)+( 1 2 +*z*)(*b* −*c*) 2)(*b* −*c*) 2*K* −1 *K*−1 2*K* −1 2*K* −1 ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* 2 = X 2*izi.* 2 2 *b* −*c* = *b. i*=0 Therefore, ***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b* and we are done. □ Using the technique described in Subsection II-A, we can The consequence of Theorem 1 is that *P*(***x****,* ***z***) distinguishes transform this equality constraint to the final penalty function: between values of ***x*** that meet the constraint and that violate the constraint. For a fixed ***x*** we have that if ***x*** meets the !2 2*K* −1 *K*−1 constraint, then the minimum of the penalty function is ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* 2 X 2*izi P*(***x****,* ***z***) = − *.* (34) *b* −*c* between 0 and 1*/*4. On the other hand, if ***x*** violates the *i*=0 constraint, then the minimum of the penalty function is In the next section we will prove that the penalty function strictly larger then 1*/*4. in (34) does indeed favour values of ***x*** that comply with the Next, we prove the proposition about the uniqueness of the constraint over values that violate it. penalty function. *Proof of Proposition 2:* The first direction of the proof *B. PROOF OF THEOREMS AND PROPOSITIONS* is the case of Theorem 1. For the other direction we divide the problem into four cases: (i) *αK >* (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b*−*c*), (ii) First we show the proof of Theorem 1, which proofs the 0 *< αK <* (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*), (iii) *αK* = 0 and (iv) *αK <* 0. intended behaviour of the penalty function. We start with the case (i) *αK >* (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b*−*c*). Suppose *Proof of Theorem 1:* Since P*K*−1 *i*=0 2*izi* is a bijection from {0*,* 1}*K* to {0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1}, we shall replace P*K*−1 ***x***⊺***a*** = *b*, then ***x*** ∈*F*. Therefore, *i*=0 2*izi* by ˆ*z* ∈{0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1} in this proof. First we will proof (1) ⇒ *α*(***a***⊺***x*** −*c*) −*z >* 2*K* −1 (2). Suppose that ***x*** ∈*F*, then ***a***⊺***x*** ≤*b* and we have *b* −*c* (***a***⊺***x*** −*c*) −*z* 2 2*K* −1 ≤2*K* −1 = 2*K* −1 *b* −*c (b* −*c)* = 2*K* −1 ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* 2 2 2 −*z* 2*. b* −*c* ≥2*K* −1 2 −(2*K* −1) Because *c* is a lower bound of ***a***⊺***x*** we know 2*K* −1 ≥2*K* −1 = 1 ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* 2 *b* −*c (c* −*c)* = 0*.* 2 2*. b* −*c* Hence, for all *z* ∈{0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1} we have *P*(***x****, z*) *>* 1*/*4. Define *<* (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*) we set For case (ii) 0 *< αK* ˆ*x* := 2*K* −1 ***a***⊺***x*** −*c **a****T* ***x*** = *b* + 1*/αK*. Clearly, ***x*** */*∈*F*, but we will show that 2 *, b* −*c* there is a *z* ∈{0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1} such that *P*(***x****, z*) ≤1*/*4. then ˆ*x* ∈[0*,* 2*K* −1 By our choice of ***x*** we have that *α*(***a***⊺***x*** −*c*) = *α*(*b* −*c*) + 1. 2] and we see Furthermore, by the bounds on *α* we get 0 *< α*(*b* −*c*) *<* ˆ*z*∈{0*,*1*,...,*2*K* −1}(ˆ*x* −ˆ*z*)2 ≤1 2*K* −1*/*2. Combining both gives us ***z***∈{0*,*1}*K P*(***x****,* ***z***) = min min 4*.* 0 *< α*(***a***⊺***x*** −*c*) *<* 2*K* + 1 2*.* Hence, there is a ***z*** ∈{0*,* 1}*K* such that *P*(***x****,* ***z***) ≤1*/*4. Next, we will complete the proof by showing (2) ⇒(1). {0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1} such that ∈ Hence there exists a *z* Let ***x*** ∈{0*,* 1}*n* and suppose that we have ***z*** ∈{0*,* 1}*K* such *P*(***x****, z*) *<* 1*/*4. that *P*(***x****,* ***z***) ≤1*/*4. Therefore, For case (iii) where *αK* = 0 we take any *x /*∈*F* and set 2*K* −1 *z* = 0. Then *P*(***x****, z*) = 0. −ˆ*z* ≤1 ***a***⊺***x*** −*c* 2 For case (iv) we have *αK <* 0. Set ***α***⊺***x*** = *c*−1*/αK*, where *b* −*c* 2 we assume that *b* ≥*c*−1*/αK*. Therefore, ***x*** ∈*F*. We then see Next we add ˆ*z* to both sides of the equation, multiply both *αK*(***a****T* ***x*** −*c*) −*z* = *αK*(***a****T* ***x*** −*c*) = −1 *b*−*c* max sides by and finally add *c* to both sides, which produces *z*∈{0*,*1*,...,*2*K* −1} 2*K* −1 2 Hence, for all *z* ∈{0*,* 1*, . . . ,* 2*K* −1} we have *P*(***x****, z*) ≥1. □ 2 + ˆ*z*) *b* −*c **a***⊺***x*** ≤*c* + (1 2*K* −1 During the proof of Proposition 2 it becomes clear that *αK <* (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*) will not produce a useful penalty 2 Rewriting the right hand side gives function as the penalty function does not distinguish between *c*(2*K* −1 values of ***x*** that meet the constrain or ones that violate the
1. + ( 1

2 + ˆ*z*)(*b* −*c*) constraint. For the case *αK >* (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b*−*c*), an argument 2*K* −1 can be made that it does differentiate between values of ***x*** that 2 98936 VOLUME 11, 2023

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach **TABLE 3.** Settings used for the DWaveSampler. **TABLE 4.** Settings for the BQM and CQM hybrid solver from DWave. Similarly to the hybrid BQM and CQM solvers, all the used solvers from Microsoft Azure Quantum Inspired Optimization were given a timeout of 10s. All other settings were left at the default, which is equal to setting all other settings to None. **REFERENCES** [1] N. Soininen and K. Huhta, ‘‘Law for decentralized electricity systems: Lessons from complexity theory,’’ in *Sustainable Energy Democracy and the Law*. Leiden, The Netherlands: Brill Nijhoff, 2021, pp. 77–98. [2] F. Shahrokhi and D. W. Matula, ‘‘The maximum concurrent flow problem,’’ *J. ACM*, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 318–334, Apr. 1990. [3] J. Edmonds and R. M. Karp, ‘‘Theoretical improvements in algorithmic efficiency for network flow problems,’’ *J. ACM*, vol. 19, no. 2, comply with the constraint and ***x*** that violate the constraint. However, values of ***x*** ∈*F*, where ***a****T* ***x*** is close to *b*, will have pp. 248–264, Apr. 1972. [4] X. Bai, H. Wei, K. Fujisawa, and Y. Wang, ‘‘Semidefinite programming for much larger values for min***z*** *P*(***x****,* ***z***), compared to values of optimal power flow problems,’’ *Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst.*, vol. 30, ***x***, where ***a***⊺***x*** is close to *c*. Hence, a penalty function where nos. 6–7, pp. 383–392, Jul. 2008. *αK >* (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*) gives a worse approximation then [5] P. H. Nguyen, W. L. Kling, G. Georgiadis, M. Papatriantafilou, L. A. Tuan, and L. Bertling, ‘‘Application of the graph theory in managing power flows a penalty function with *αK* = (2*K* −1*/*2)*/*(*b* −*c*). in future electric networks,’’ in *New Frontiers Graph Theory*, Y. Zhang, Ed. Lastly, we show the proof of the size of the penalty when Rijeka, Croatia: IntechOpen, 2012, ch. 12. [6] Y. Yamagata and H. Seya, ‘‘Proposal for a local electricity-sharing system: a constraint is violated. A case study of Yokohama city, Japan,’’ *IET Intell. Transp. Syst.*, vol. 9, *Proof of Proposition 3:* Let *x*̸ ∈*F*, then ***a***⊺***x*** *> b*. no. 1, pp. 38–49, Feb. 2015. Therefore, we know *αK*(***a****T* ***x*** −*c*) *>* 2*K* −1*/*2. Hence, the [7] T. Tanjo, K. Minami, and H. Maruyama, ‘‘Graph partitioning of power grids considering electricity sharing,’’ *Int. J. Smart Grid Clean Energy*, *P*(***x****,* ***z***) is minimized when all *zi* values are 1 and the total *i*=0 2*izi* becomes 2*K* −1. Thus, we get: vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 112–120, Apr. 2016. sum P*K*−1 [8] B. Ghaddar, J. Marecek, and M. Mevissen, ‘‘Optimal power flow as a polynomial optimization problem,’’ *IEEE Trans. Power Syst.*, vol. 31, no. 1, *z*∈{0*,*1}*K P*(***x****,* ***z***) = (*αK*(***a****T* ***x*** −*c*) −2*K* + 1)2*.* min pp. 539–546, Jan. 2016. [9] A. L. Bella, P. Klaus, G. Ferrari-Trecate, and R. Scattolini, ‘‘Supervised MPC control of large-scale electricity networks via clustering methods,’’ Next, we substitute ***a***⊺***x*** = *ε* + *b* and use some basic algebra 2020, *arXiv:2004.14117*. [10] A. L. Bella, P. Klaus, G. Ferrari-Trecate, and R. Scattolini, ‘‘Supervised to produce model predictive control of large-scale electricity networks via clustering *z*∈{0*,*1}*K P*(***x****,* ***z***) = (*αK*(*b* −*c*) + *αKε* −2*K* + 1)2*.* methods,’’ *Optim. Control Appl. Methods*, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 44–64, min Jan. 2022. [11] A. Safdarian, P. H. Divshali, M. Baranauskas, A. Keski-Koukkari, and Note that *αK*(*b* −*c*) = 2*K* −1*/*2. Using this property then A. Kulmala, ‘‘Coalitional game theory based value sharing in energy communities,’’ *IEEE Access*, vol. 9, pp. 78266–78275, 2021. produces the final result [12] N. S. Hadjidimitriou, A. Frangioni, A. Lodi, and T. Koch, *Mathematical Optimization for Efficient and Robust Energy Networks* (AIRO Springer *z*∈{0*,*1}*K P*(***x****,* ***z***) = (2*K* −1 2 + *αKε* −2*K* + 1)2 Series). Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2021. min [13] I. Hen and M. S. Sarandy, ‘‘Driver Hamiltonians for constrained optimization in quantum annealing,’’ *Phys. Rev. A, Gen. Phys.*, vol. 93, = (1 no. 6, Jun. 2016, Art. no. 062312. 2 + *αKε*)2 [14] I. Hen and F. M. Spedalieri, ‘‘Quantum annealing for constrained optimization,’’ *Phys. Rev. Appl.*, vol. 5, no. 3, Mar. 2016, Art. no. 034007. = 1 4 + *αkε* + (*αkε*)2 [15] E. Zahedinejad and A. Zaribafiyan, ‘‘Combinatorial optimization on gate model quantum computers: A survey,’’ 2017, *arXiv:1708.05294*. [16] S. Hadfield, Z. Wang, B. O’Gorman, E. Rieffel, D. Venturelli, and □ R. Biswas, ‘‘From the quantum approximate optimization algorithm to a quantum alternating operator ansatz,’’ *Algorithms*, vol. 12, no. 2, p. 34, Feb. 2019. **APPENDIX B** [17] D. J. Griffiths and D. F. Schroeter, *Introduction to Quantum Mechanics*. **SOLVER PARAMETERS** Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2018. For this research, the Advantage_system4.1 was used. The [18] A. Messiah, *Quantum Mechanics*. Chelmsford, MA, USA: Courier annealig time was set to 1000*µ*s and the number of reads was Corporation, 2014. [19] C. C. McGeoch, ‘‘Theory versus practice in annealing-based quantum set to 500. All others settings were left at default, which is computing,’’ *Theor. Comput. Sci.*, vol. 816, pp. 169–183, May 2020. equal to the settings shown in Table 3. [20] A. Lucas, ‘‘Ising formulations of many NP problems,’’ *Frontiers Phys.*, vol. 2, p. 5, Feb. 2014. For the hybrid BQM and CQM solvers of DWave, there is [21] S. E. Venegas-Andraca, W. Cruz-Santos, C. McGeoch, and M. Lanzagorta, just one parameter to set, which is the time limit. This was set ‘‘A cross-disciplinary introduction to quantum annealing-based algo- to 10 seconds. rithms,’’ *Contemp. Phys.*, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 174–197, Apr. 2018. VOLUME 11, 2023 98937

G. Colucci et al.: Power Network Optimization: A Quantum Approach [22] F. Glover, G. Kochenberger, R. Hennig, and Y. Du, ‘‘Quantum bridge [44] M. Dukalski, D. Rovetta, S. van der Linde, M. Möller, N. Neumann, analytics I: A tutorial on formulating and using qubo models,’’ *Ann. Oper.* and F. Phillipson, ‘‘Quantum computer-assisted global optimization in *Res.*, vol. 314, pp. 141–183, Apr. 2022. geophysics illustrated with stack-power maximization for refraction [23] C.-E. Bichot and P. Siarry, *Graph Partitioning*. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, residual statics estimation,’’ *Geophysics*, vol. 88, no. 2, pp. V75–V91,
1. [24] K. Masato and N. Hiromi, *Divide-and-Conquer Approaches to Quantum*

Mar. 2023. [45] M. Carsten, M. Wided, and K. David, ‘‘SciGRID—An open source reference model for the European transmission network (v0.2),’’ SciGRID, *Chemistry: Theory and Implementation*. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer, 2011, pp. 97–127. Jul. 2016. [46] L. Yang and A. Shami, ‘‘On hyperparameter optimization of machine [25] F. Rosato, ‘‘Heuristic graph partitioning with preferred cluster sizes and application to the generation of realistic distribution grid topologies,’’ in learning algorithms: Theory and practice,’’ *Neurocomputing*, vol. 415, pp. 295–316, Nov. 2020. *Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Conf. Compat., Power Electron. Power Eng. (CPE- POWERENG)*, Jul. 2021, pp. 1–7. [47] J. Tilly, ‘‘The variational quantum Eigensolver: A review of methods and best practices,’’ *Phys. Rep.*, vol. 986, pp. 1–128, Nov. 2022. [26] A. B. Kahng, J. Lienig, I. L. Markov, and J. Hu, *VLSI Physical Design From Graph Partitioning to Timing Closure*, vol. 312. Cham, Switzerland: [48] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, ‘‘A quantum approximate optimization algorithm,’’ 2014, *arXiv:1411.4028*. Springer, 2011. [27] M. Toril, I. Molina-Fernández, V. Wille, and C. Walshaw, ‘‘Analysis of [49] F. Leymann and J. Barzen, ‘‘The bitter truth about gate-based quantum heuristic graph partitioning methods for the assignment of packet control algorithms in the NISQ era,’’ *Quantum Sci. Technol.*, vol. 5, no. 4, units in GERAN,’’ *Wireless Pers. Commun.*, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 611–633, Sep. 2020, Art. no. 044007. Oct. 2011. [28] C. Márquez, E. César, and J. Sorribes, ‘‘Graph-based automatic dynamic GIUSEPPE COLUCCI received the B.Sc. and load balancing for HPC agent-based simulations,’’ in *Proc. Eur. Conf.* M.Sc. degrees in physics from the University *Parallel Process.*, S. Hunold, A. Costan, D. Giménez, A. Iosup, L. Ricci, of Bari Aldo Moro, Italy, in 2008 and 2010, M. Engracia, G. Requena, V. Scarano, A. L. Varbanescu, S. L. Scott, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in theoretical S. Lankes, J. Weidendorfer, and M. Alexander, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: physics from Goethe University, Frankfurt am Springer, 2015, pp. 405–416. Main, Germany, in 2014. [29] U. V. Catalyurek and C. Aykanat, ‘‘Hypergraph-partitioning-based decom- position for parallel sparse-matrix vector multiplication,’’ *IEEE Trans.* From 2014 to 2016, he was a Software Engineer *Parallel Distrib. Syst.*, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 673–693, Jul. 1999. with UL TS, Leiden, The Netherlands, and then [30] S. Navlakha and C. Kingsford, ‘‘Exploring biological network dynamics as a Quantitative Analyst with Rabobank, Utrecht, with ensembles of graph partitions,’’ in *Proc. Pacific Symp. Biocomputing.* The Netherlands, from 2016 to 2018. He currently *Pacific Symp. Biocomput.*, 2010, pp. 77–166. invests the role of Senior ALM Specialist with de Volksbank, Utrecht, [31] C. Tsourakakis, C. Gkantsidis, B. Radunovic, and M. Vojnovic, ‘‘FEN- The Netherlands. He is also the Founder of Quantum Quants, Rotterdam, NEL: Streaming graph partitioning for massive scale graphs,’’ in *Proc. 7th* The Netherlands, established in 2020, which helps companies to get insights *ACM Int. Conf. Web Search Data Mining*, Feb. 2014, pp. 333–342. on quantum computing and develop business applications of quantum [32] T. Lopes, V. Ströele, M. Dantas, R. Braga, and J.-F. Meháut, ‘‘A parallel computing. He published several articles in theoretical nuclear physics and graph partitioning approach to enhance community detection in social quantum computing. His research interest includes applications of quantum networks,’’ in *Proc. IEEE Symp. Comput. Commun. (ISCC)*, Jul. 2020, computing to business use cases, with a focus on optimization in the financial pp. 1–6. and energy sectors. [33] L. Hyafil and R. L. Rivest, ‘‘Graph partitioning and constructing optimal decision trees are polynomial complete problems,’’ *Laboratoire de* STAN VAN DER LINDE received the degree in *Recherche en Informatique et Automatique, Rapport de Recherche*, vol. 33, pp. 1–9, Oct. 1973. applied mathematics from the Delft University [34] M. R. Garey, D. S. Johnson, and L. Stockmeyer, ‘‘Some simplified NP- of Technology, in 2021. For the master’s thesis, complete graph problems,’’ *Theor. Comput. Sci.*, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 237–267, he worked on using quantum annealing for a Feb. 1976. geophysical application. [35] A. Buluç, H. Meyerhenke, I. Safro, P. Sanders, and C. Schulz, ‘‘Recent His specialization is in computational science advances in graph partitioning,’’ in *Algorithm Engineering*. Cham, and engineering. During his studies, he focused on Switzerland: Springer, 2016. numerical mathematics, optimization, and quan- [36] H. Ushijima-Mwesigwa, C. F. A. Negre, and S. M. Mniszewski, ‘‘Graph tum information courses. Since 2022, he has been partitioning using quantum annealing on the D-wave system,’’ in *Proc. 2nd* a Junior Scientist with the Applied Cryptography *Int. Workshop Post Moores Era Supercomput.*, Nov. 2017, pp. 22–29. & Quantum Algorithms Department, TNO. Within this department, he works [37] S. Pramanik and M. G. Chandra, ‘‘Quantum-assisted graph clustering and on bridging the gap between industry and academia in the field of quantum quadratic unconstrained D-ary optimisation,’’ 2020, *arXiv:2004.02608*. computing. To this end, he researches (hybrid) quantum computing methods [38] C. F. A. Negre, H. Ushijima-Mwesigwa, and S. M. Mniszewski, ‘‘Detecting that could be used on industry-sized problems. multiple communities using quantum annealing on the D-wave system,’’ *PLoS ONE*, vol. 15, no. 2, Feb. 2020, Art. no. e0227538. [39] U. Chukwu, R. Dridi, J. Berwald, M. Booth, J. Dawson, D. Le, M. Wainger, FRANK PHILLIPSON received the degree in and S. P. Reinhardt, ‘‘Constrained-optimization approach delivers superior econometrics and operations research from VU classical performance for graph partitioning via quantum-ready method,’’ Amsterdam, in 1996, the P.D.Eng. degree in in *Proc. IEEE High Perform. Extreme Comput. Conf. (HPEC)*, Sep. 2020, applied mathematics from the Delft University pp. 1–6. of Technology, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in [40] S. Greer and D. O’Malley, ‘‘An approach to seismic inversion with business analytics from VU Amsterdam, in 2014. quantum annealing,’’ in *Proc. SEG Tech. Program Expanded Abstr.*, From 1998 to 2003, he was employed with Sep. 2020, pp. 2845–2849. KPN (Royal Dutch Telecom) Research. In 2004, [41] S. Mugel, C. Kuchkovsky, E. Sánchez, S. Fernández-Lorenzo, J. Luis-Hita, he joined TNO, the Netherlands Organization for E. Lizaso, and R. Orús, ‘‘Dynamic portfolio optimization with real datasets Applied Scientific Research. He is currently a using quantum processors and quantum-inspired tensor networks,’’ *Phys.* Senior Scientist with the Department of Applied Cryptography & Quantum *Rev. Res.*, vol. 4, no. 1, Jan. 2022, Art. no. 013006. Algorithms, TNO, where he is responsible for the research into applications [42] F. Phillipson and H. S. Bhatia, ‘‘Portfolio optimisation using the D-wave on quantum computing devices. He is also a part-time Full Professor of quantum annealer,’’ 2020, *arXiv:2012.01121*. computational operations research with Maastricht University, researching [43] F. Phillipson and I. Chiscop, ‘‘A quantum approach for tactical capacity management of distributed electricity generation,’’ in *Proc. Int. Conf.* the use of quantum computers and other accelerating hardware for solving *Innov. Community Services*, F. Phillipson, G. Eichler, C. Erfurth, and optimization problems. G. Fahrnberger, Eds. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2022, pp. 323–333. 98938 VOLUME 11, 2023
