# Quantum_Annealing_based_Power_Grid_Partitioning_fo

1

## Quantum Annealing based Power Grid Partitioning

## for Parallel Simulation

Carsten Hartmann*∗* , Junjie Zhang*∗*,*†* , Carlos D. Gonzalez Calaza*§*,*†* , Thiemo Pesch*∗* , Kristel Michielsen *§*,*†* and Andrea Benigni*∗*,*†*,*‡*, *Senior Member, IEEE ∗*ICE-1: Energy Systems Engineering *§* Institute for Advanced Simulation, J¨ulich Supercomputing Centre Forschungszentrum J¨ulich, 52425 J¨ulich, Germany *†* RWTH Aachen University, 52056 Aachen, Germany *‡* JARA-Energy, J¨ulich 52425, Germany

### arXiv:2408.04097v1  [eess.SY]  7 Aug 2024

*{*c.hartmann, a.benigni*}*@fz-juelich.de ***Abstract*****—Graph partitioning has many applications in power** optimal partitioning for parallel simulation should ensure a **systems from decentralized state estimation to parallel simula-** good balancing of the computing loads and should minimize **tion. Focusing on parallel simulation, optimal grid partitioning** the overheads created by the partitioning. **minimizes the idle time caused by different simulation times for** The problem of grid or graph partitioning, in two or more **the sub-networks and their components and reduces the overhead** parts, is a fundamental problem in computer science and com- **required to simulate the cuts. Partitioning a graph into two parts such that, for example, the cut is minimal and the sub-** binatorial optimization, known for its NP-hard complexity [8], **graphs have equal size is an NP-hard problem. In this paper** which is hard to solve for classical computers and heuristics **we show how optimal partitioning of a graph can be obtained** are usually applied [9]. Consequently, recent advances in quan- **using quantum annealing (QA). We show how to map the** tum hardware have raised interest in exploring the potential of **requirements for optimal splitting to a quadratic unconstrained** quantum computation as an alternative to established classical **binary optimization (QUBO) formulation and test the proposed formulation using a current D-Wave QPU. We show that the** approaches. Thus, a new research field is emerging: Quantum **necessity to find an embedding of the QUBO on current D-Wave** computation for power systems [10], [11]. Recent advances in **QPUs limits the problem size to under 200 buses and notably** this field can be grouped into three categories: **affects the time-to-solution. We finally discuss the implications on** First, classical algorithms to solve systems of linear or **near-term implementation of QA in combination to traditional** nonlinear equations are replaced with quantum subroutines **CPU or GPU based simulation.** such as the HHL algorithm [12] or specially designed varia- ***Index Terms*****—Parallel algorithms, Power system simulation,** tional quantum circuits [13]. The HHL algorithm promises an **Quantum theory, Graph theory** exponential speed-up in the asymptotic limit if the problem is sparse [12] and the condition number can be bounded I. INTRODUCTION tightly [14]; however, it still faces input/output problems and With the transformation of the energy system towards requires circuits that are too deep for NISQ hardware. Never- renewable energies, the efforts required to model, simulate theless, proposed applications for HHL involve i. e. to solve and control the system are steadily increasing. Whereas in the DC and AC power flow equations [15], [16]. To circumvent past a limited number of large power plants adjusted supply some issues with the HHL algorithm, a variational circuit to demand, power balancing is increasingly characterized by a for a quantum electromagnetic transients program has been much larger number of smaller generation units, mostly based proposed [17]; however, quantum advantage has yet not been on fluctuating renewable energies, as well as more and more experimentally realized for any variational approach [13]. flexible consumers and prosumers. One way to manage the Second, decision problems representing fundamental op- complexity of simulating and controlling these systems is to erational or planning problems in power systems are re- parallelize the problem by separating the overall system into formulated to fit quantum optimization approaches. These smaller subsystems, which can then be solved on separate involve the unit commitment problem [18], network reconfig- computing nodes. This network partitioning can also enable uration in distribution grids [19] or optimal power flow [20]. the use of flexible, distributed and adaptable smart grids mon- However, on current hardware, only small problems can be itoring [1] and control solutions [2]. Other grid partitioning tackled, which spiked recent interest in the decomposition of applications include dividing into optimal balancing regions UC problem into smaller instances [21], [22]. to reduce i. e. administrative and computational complexity Third, quantum optimization is used to support classical and loop flows [3]; controlled islanding to prevent failure simulation or optimization by, e.g., finding optimal cut in spreading [4] and diakoptics based state estimation [1]. In this benders decomposition to solve large instances for the UC paper we focus on the problem of partitioning a power system problem [23]. graph so to enable parallel simulation. While dependent on The idea presented in this paper falls into the third category the specific simulation algorithm used, in general [5]–[7], an and explores graph partitioning to enhance the parallel simula-

2 tion of power systems. The graph partitioning problem entails i.e. the energy difference between the ground state and the dividing the vertices of a graph into subgraphs while minimiz- first excited state at the point of the evolution where these are ing the number of edges between different subgraphs and/or closest in energy. achieving other specific objectives. Partitioning a graph into For current D-Wave Advantage QPUs, the mixer *HM* is *n σ*(1) two parts, such that both subgraphs are of equal size, admits a fixed as P [30], [32]. Then, the ground state of *HM*, *n* natural quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) thus the initial state, is given by the uniform superposition formulation [24]. Thus, the problem fits established quantum of all possible configurations in the eigenbasis of *HP* . During optimization paradigms such as quantum annealing (QA) [25] anneal, *HM* causes quantum tunneling between configurations or QAOA [26]. If advances in hardware are achievable, both in analogy to thermal fluctuations in simulated annealing [33]. approaches promise to solve large problem instances that are After the anneal, the state of the spin glass is measured in the classically intractable. Partitioning into more than two parts eigenbasis of *HP* . In an ideal QA process, using a sufficiently based on the idea of network modularity can also be mapped large annealing time, the outcome *s*1*...sN* of this measurement to a QUBO; however, it requires costly integer encoding [27]. should be one of the ground states of *HP* . The article is structured as follows: Section II gives a short Quantum annealing is a *heuristic* solver as the adiabatic overview of QA. Section III reviews, combines and extends theorem does not strictly apply in practice. The real-world QUBO formulations for graph partitioning. Section IV gives implementation is neither closed nor are the annealing times a short overview of parallel simulation of power grids and its infinitely long. Consequently, the system can undergo a tran- relation to graph partitioning, considering the specific algo- sition to an excited state of *HP* during anneal at any time, rithm of [5]. Section V combines the findings of the previous for example, due to thermal fluctuations. Then the outcome two sections to derive a tailored graph partitioning QUBO for of an anneal is not a globally optimal solution to the original parallel simulation. Section VI discusses the optimal and near- problem *Q*. optimal solutions and current hardware limitations. *B. Assessing the Quality of a Solution* II. SOLVING QUBOS USING QUANTUM ANNEALING Since QA is a heuristic solver, similar to simulated an- *A. Quantum Annealing in a Nutshell* nealing, one usually performs *Ns* anneals Eq. (2) to create *Ns* solution candidates. For each sampled configuration with A quadratic unconstrained binary optimization (QUBO) energy *Esampled*, the relative error is defined as problem in its general form is given by *L* = *|Emin, global −Esampled| {zn∈*[0*,*1]*} Q* min *,* (3) *|Emin, global| M* (1) where *Emin, global* is the energy of the global optimal solution. X *Q* = *znQn,mzm,* In general, *Emin, global* is not known a priori, except for two *n,m*=1 cases: The problem instance is small enough to be solved by where *Qn,m* are the entries of an *M × M* symmetric matrix. brute force methods on CPUs, or the problem is formulated in The objective function of a QUBO can be transformed into a such a way that the minimal energy of the objective function classical Ising Hamiltonian *HP* by a linear transformation in is known, cf., for example, the number partitioning problem the variables *sn* = 2*zn −*1 *∈{−*1*,* 1*}*. *HP* is then the energy discussed in [24]. function of a spin glass, and the problem of finding an optimal To quantify the quality of a sample set, one defines the solution of *Q* has been translated into finding a ground state *lowest relative error* [34] as of *HP* . Due to symmetries in the problem, the ground state *Lmin* := *Esampled L .* min (4) energy can be degenerate and several ground states encode equivalent solutions. The idea of QA [25] is based on the quantum adiabatic *C. Time to (Best) Solution* theorem [28], [29] that roughly states that a closed system As a consequence of sampling *Ns* times, the annealing time stays in its ground state if it undergoes an adiabatic transfor- *TA* is not the only parameter that affects the time to find a glob- mation, that is a transformation that takes significantly longer ally (or near) optimal solution, and there is a trade-off between than the time scales set by the internal dynamics. In quantum longer annealing times and sampling more configurations. This annealing, a system is initially prepared in a ground state of a trade-off is captured by the *time to solution* (*TTS*) [34], [35] mixer Hamiltonian *HM*. Then the instantaneous Hamiltonian which is defined as the ’time’ to reach a globally optimal (or is ’slowly’ evolved towards the problem Hamiltonian *HP* in best) solution, at least once with probability *pS* and is given an *annealing schedule* given by by *H*(*t*) = *A*(*t*)*HM* + *B*(*t*)*HP ,* log(1 *−pS*) *TTS*(*pS, TA*) := *TA,* (5) (2) log(1 *−Nopt* with: *A*(0) *≫B*(0)*, A*(*TA*) *≪B*(*TA*)*, NS* ) where the tunneling energy *A* and problem energy *B* are where *Nopt* is the number of globally optimal (or: best) monotonous functions whose typical schedule can be found solutions in the sample set. in [30] and *TA* is the *annealing time*, which should be large The time to solution only partially reflects the actual QPU compared to the inverse of the minimum energy gap [31], access time [36], as it only considers the annealing time and

3 neglects delays and constant-overhead QPU programming and flow [43]. Let *wn,m* be the weight associated with the edge readout times. *e* = (*n, m*). We seek to minimize the sum of the weights over all edges in the cut set *D. Minor Embeddings* X *wn,m*(*−*2*znzm* + *zn* + *zm*)*. Qcut* = (7) The current D-Wave Advantage system has more than 5000 (*n,m*)*∈E* qubits and more than 35000 couplers [34] arranged in a Pegasus graph, in which qubits are coupled to at most 15 other Note that (*−*2*znzm* + *zn* + *zm*) = 1 if nodes *n* and *m* are in qubits. To sample the QUBO on the QPU, the *logical graph* different sub-graphs and evaluates to 0 if they are in the same representing the couplings *Qn,m* between the variables *zn* and part. *zm* must be mapped to the hardware graph. If the QUBO Using the adjacency matrix ***A*** of the graph *G*, we can can not be mapped directly, for example, due to the QUBO rewrite Eq. (7) as graph having a higher degree than that of the hardware graph, X several physical qubits are strongly coupled ferromagnetically *Qcut* = *zn*(*−*2*An,mwn,m*)*zm* to form a *chain* representing one logical variable (or qubit) *n,m∈V* (8) [37]. Finding such a *(minor) embedding* of the logical graph ! X X + *zn* 2 *An,mwn,m zn,* onto the QPU graph is usually done heuristically [38]. *n∈V m∈V* III. QUBO FORMULATION FOR GRAPH PARTITIONING to resemble the standard form (1) and read off the matrix A *partition* of a graph *G* = (*V, E*), where *V* is a set of elements (*Qcut*)*n,m*. vertices/nodes and *E ⊆V × V* a set of edges connecting the *2) Balancing the Sizes of the Sub-Graphs:* Another poten- nodes, is an allocation of nodes to two (or more) sub-graphs tial goal is to balance between the sizes, i.e., the number of *Gi* = (*Vi, Ei*) *⊂G* such that each vertex *v ∈V* is in only one nodes *Ni*, of both sub-graphs. To derive the objective function sub-graph. That is, the vertex sets *Vi* are mutually disjoint and in QUBO form given by Lucas [24], we start with the hard the union of all vertex sets is the original vertex set. The *cut* constraint that is satisfied if both sides have the same number set is comprised by all edges *e* = (*vi, vj*) that connect nodes of nodes *vi ∈Vi* and *vj ∈Vj* in different parts, that is, *i̸* = *j*. In this X X *zn* = (1 *−zn*)*.* work, we primarily focus on the partitioning into two parts *n n* as this admits a straightforward binary representation of the By squaring the difference between both sides, we turn the problem. hard constraint into a quadratic objective function Graph partitioning is a task frequently encountered in real- world applications, e.g. community detection [39], studying !2 X immunization strategies [40], and decomposition of quadratic X *Qsize* = *zn* + (*zn −*1) *,* (9) pseudo-Boolean functions [41]. However, graph partitioning *n n* is known to be NP-hard [8]. Dedicated heuristics exist to find that penalizes a partitioning if *N*1*̸* = *N*2. By multiplying the optimal partitioning based on the goals of the application out, *Qsize* can be brought into the standard QUBO form, cf. [42], in particular for power grids [9]. Eq. (1). For the partitioning of a graph into two parts, another *3) Balancing the Sum of the Edge Weights:* Instead of approach is to formulate the goals as objectives of a QUBO. balancing the size of the sub-graphs, we could also seek to The *N* = *|V|* binary/decision variables *zn* encode to which balance the sums of the edge weights *wn,m* (to the power part (sub-graph after partitioning) the *n*-th node belongs, that *p*) between the sub-graphs. As a hard constraint, this can be is ( 1 if node *n ∈V*1, written as *zn* = (6) 0 if node *n ∈V*2. X ! X X *An,mwp zn* = *α*(*n, p*)(1 *−zn*)*,* (10) Following the work of [24] and [39], we briefly review *n,m n∈V m∈V n∈V* and extend QUBO formulations for four different objectives: | {z } Minimizing the cut [24], and balancing the sizes *Ni* = *|Vi|* of :=*α*(*n,p*) the two sub-graphs *V*1 and *V*2 [24], balancing the sum of the where we have introduced the term *α*(*n, p*) to shorten the edge weights within both parts and maximizing the network notation. Again, this constraint can be turned into a quadratic modularity [39]. objective function *Qweights*(*p*) by the same steps as for *Qsize*. Note that the weights of the edges in the cut set are attributed *A. QUBO Formulations for the Single Objectives* to both parts and thus cancel each other out. The power *1) Minimal (Weighted) Cut:* One potential objective is to *p* can be used to tune the objective. If *p* = 1, the sums minimize the number of edges between both parts. A QUBO of all weights in each part are balanced. For *p >>* 1, the formulation for this goal has been derived by Lucas [24]. Here contributions of small weights are scaled down relatively to we extend Lucas’s formulation to find the minimal *weighted* the maximal weights, such that balancing the maximal weights cut, a problem that is also associated with finding the maximal is emphasized.

4 *4) Network Modularity:* Lastly, maximizing the network of the link between partitions (referred to as ”cut” in the modularity [39] is a common method to detect communities, following), and *ZL*, *iL*, *VL* are the impedance matrix, current that is, highly connected components representing functional and voltage vectors over the cut, respectively. Reformulating units. These components provide a natural partitioning of the Eq. (13) as graph. The (negative) network modularity is equivalent to an *Y −*1  1 0 *N*1 *CN*1   *vN*1  Ising Hamiltonian and, thus, admits a straightforward QUBO *Y −*1 *vN*2 = 0 1 *N*2 *CN*2 formulation given by    *CT N*1*CT iL* 0 0 *N*2 + *ZL* (14) (*−*1 ) *M* (*An,m −deg*(*n*)*deg*(*m*) *Y −*1 X  *N*1 *hN*1  *Qmod* = *zn* ) *zm,* (11) 2*M Y −*1 *N*2 *hN*2 *, n,m*  *YN*1*hN*1 + *YN*2*hN*2 + *VL* where *M* is the number of edges, *deg*(*n*) the degree of node *n*. To derive *Qmod* from [39] we have used that P *m An,m* = shows that the solutions of each sub-network become inde- *deg*(*n*) and P *n deg*(*n*) = 2*M*. pendent of each other except for the cut. Hence, parallel Graph partitioning into more than two parts using integer computation of the sub-networks is possible after solving encoding based on the idea of network modularity has been the equations over the cut. Additionally, finer parallelizations recently discussed by Wang et al. [27]. can be applied to each sub-network, such as the approaches in [6], [7], [47], [48]. Overall, each time step in simulating a partitioned network can be divided into three stages [5]: *B. QUBO using Linear Scalarization*
1. Components of each sub-network are solved to obtain the

Combining several of the previously introduced objectives, injections to the network, we obtain a *multi-objective optimization* program with poten-
1. Equations over the cut are solved,

tially *conflicting objectives*. For example, *Qcut* is minimized
1. The network equations in each sub-network are solved in

if the cut set is empty; that is, all nodes are allocated to the parallel with the injections from components and the cut. same part. However, this is not optimal if we also want to, Based on these three steps, we can formulate an optimiza- e.g., balance the sizes of the two sub-graphs. tion problem to find good partitioning so that the overall For quantum optimization, we need to turn the multi- computation time is minimized. The objectives for optimal objective optimization program into a single QUBO. Hence, partitioning are: we collect the single objectives in a weighted sum
1. minimizing the additional computational cost due to the

X *Q* = *λiQi,* (12) cut, *i*
1. minimizing the difference in computational cost among

where *i ∈{cut, size, weights, mod}*. sub-networks to minimize the ’idle time’. The coefficients *λi* have to be chosen a priori and effectively determine the importance of each objective as they set the V. GRID PARTITIONING TO MINIMIZE OVERHEAD IN energy scale. Different choices for the coefficients *λi* can lead PARALLEL SIMULATION to different optimal points on the convex hull of the Pareto *A. Estimation and Balancing of Computational Costs* front [44]. We now need to estimate the computational costs of sim- ulating the partitioned sub-networks to derive the objective IV. PARALLEL SIMULATION OF POWER GRIDS BASED ON function. For simplicity, we approximate these costs using NETWORK PARTITIONING the computation needed number of floating point operations Parallel simulation of power networks following partitioning (FLOPs). has been a common technique in power system simulations for *1) Component costs:* Dynamic components can be de- decades. There are different but similar approaches proposed scribed as differential algebraic system of equations (DAE) for parallel simulation with partitioned networks, which all and solved with numerical integration. Assuming explicit involve simulating the partitioned sub-networks in parallel methods are used, we can discretize the integration as with a sequential part left associated with the link between the sub-networks [5], [45], [46]. Take the diakoptics-based method *xk*+1 *←xk* + *h* ˙*xk,* (15) MATE [5] as an example. The modified nodal analysis (MNA) *y ←g*(*x*)*,* (16) formulation of the electric network *Y V* = *I* for a partitioned where Eq. (15) describes the integration of internal states network assumes a block diagonal form *x, y* of the component and Eq. (16) the injections from  [*YN*1 0 ]   *vN*1   *hN*1  *C* components to the grid. Therefore, we take the FLOPs in 0 *YN*2 *vN*2 = *hN*2 *,* (13)     computing Eq. (15), Eq. (16) to represent the cost *ci* for *CT −ZL iL −VL* solving the ith component. where *hNk*, *YNk*, *vNk* for *k ∈{*1*,* 2*}* represent current injec- A partitioning of the network into two sub-networks de- tions, admittance matrix, nodal voltages (including currents composes all components into three disjoint sets: the sets of chosen as independent variables as of MNA) in each sub- all components in distinct parts (sub-network 1, 2), and in the networks, respectively. *C* represents the connectivity matrix cut, respectively. Let *C*1(2) and *Ccut* be the index sets, e.g.

5 the ith component is in part 1 if *i ∈C*1. Then the ’idle time’, *i* i. e. mismatch of computing load in different sub-networks, is FLOPs to solve G given by X X ∆*Wcomp.* = *ci − ci.* (17) *i i∈C*1 *i∈C*2 *2) Cut costs:* Computations on the cut consist of two parts, updating the mutual injections between the cut and sub- 1.0 networks and solving the component equations and network equations within the cuts. Since the computation for updating 12 normalized computational costs ˆ*ce* 13 G the injections are matrix-vector multiplications, the cost for 14 0.8 solving the component equations and updating the injections 6 11 10 for two sub-networks is given by 9 0.6 X *Wcinj* = *ci* + 4*Mc*(*N −*1) + *Mc,* 5 7 *i∈Ccut* 4 8 0.4 G 1 2 where *Mc* is the number of edges in the cut. Solving for the cut or the sub-networks (see below) is 3 0.2 G equivalent to solving independent sets of linear equations, i. e. G solving *Ax* = *b* for *x*. We assume that LU decomposition is used since the decomposition must only be performed once if there are no topological changes. In each simulation step, the Fig. 1. Steps to turn power grid into *Gsim*. First, map each component, cost for solving the (sub)-network is then given by the FLOPs e.g. generator and lines, to an edge *e* whose weight ˆ*ce* represents the FLOPs for forward and backward substitution. Hence, for solving the needed to solve for the current *ie*. Second, build a graph that resembles the grid topology. network equations over the cut, we have *Wcut, network* = 2*M* 2 *c −Mc.* The problem of finding an optimal partitioning of the Using that *Mc ≪N*, the total overhead induced by the cut network into two sub-networks for parallel simulation is thus can be estimated as equivalent to finding an optimal partitioning of the graph *Ggrid* taking into account all components whose computational costs X *Wcut ≈ ci* + 4(*N −*1)*Mc.* (18) are represented by the weights *ce* of the edges in *Gsim*. We *i∈Ccut* only need to partition the graph *Ggrid ⊂Gsim* as the nodes in *3) Sub-network costs:* Solving for the sub-networks is *Vsim \ Vgrid* don’t represent any additional partition choices again done by LU decomposition. Therefore, the mismatch regarding the network and thus the components: All edges in solving sub-network is given by the difference between representing components between nodes in different parts *Vi* forward and backward substitution costs in each part: are in the cut set. For all other components, there is at least one node *n ∈Vgrid* incident whose assignment to *V*1 or *V*2 ∆*Wnetworks* = 2(*N* 2 1 *−N* 2 2 ) *−*(*N*1 *−N*2) (19) provides the assignment of the component to part 1 or part 2. = 2*N*∆*N −*∆*N. C. QUBO Formulation B. Graph representation* To find an optimal partitioning of *Ggrid* we map each of Let *Ggrid* = (*Vgrid, Egrid*) be a graph representing the grid the three objectives of minimizing the costs for simulating the topology, that is, the nodes *n ∈Vgrid* represent buses and cut, balancing the cost of simulating the components and the the edges *e ∈Egrid* represent the electrical transmission lines. network in each part, see section IV, to one of the general To put all the components, i. e. generators and transmission QUBO objectives from section III. Each of these mappings is lines, on an equal footing, we construct a *simulation graph* chosen such that the objective values of the QUBO term are *Gsim* = (*Vsim, Esim*) *⊃Ggrid* based on the grid *Ggrid* in the some measure for the computational overhead that arises due following way: Except the transmission lines that are already to the partitioning into sub-networks, cf. section V-A. The sum represented as edges, we represent each component attached of all three objective values is then an estimate for the quality to a bus *n ∈Vgrid* by an *additionally added* edge1 that is of the partitioning and the full QUBO objective function is incident to the bus *n*. Hence all electrical components are thus a simple sum of three terms represented by edges in the graph *Gsim*. To all edges, we then assign a weight ˆ*ce* = *ce/cmax ∈*[0*,* 1] that represents *Qpart.* = *Qcomponents* + *Qcut* + *Qnetwork.* (20) the normalized computational cost (normalized FLOPs) of Due to this construction, we avoid the additional problem of simulating the respective component, cf. Section V-A. The choosing the weights *λi* a priori. steps to construct *Gsim* are illustrated in Fig. 1. *1) Reduce ’idle’ time in component simulation:* For the 1We also add an additional node for each component. component simulation step, we want to minimize the idle time

6 that arises if one part can be simulated faster than the other, Case 30 Modiﬁed 1*.*0 see Eq. (17). By adopting from *Qweights* in Eq. (10), a QUBO normalized computational costs ˆ*ce* objective function *Qcomponents* that computes the squared idle 0*.*8 time for a given partitioning is given by X 0*.*6 *Qcomponents* = *zn* (4*α*(*n*)*α*(*m*)) *zm n,m∈Vgrid* (21) 0*.*4 X *zn* (*−*4*α*(*n*)*β*) *zn* + *β*2*,* + 0*.*2 *n∈Vgrid* P *m∈Vsim An,m*(*Gsim*)ˆ*cn,m* Part 1 Part 2 Generator where *α*(*n*) := and *β* = P *m∈Vgrid α*(*m*). Fig. 2. Optimal partitionings for Case 30 (left) and a modified Case 30 (right), *2) Minimize the computational costs of cut simulation:* where one generator has been moved to a different bus. The optimal solutions Minimizing the total overhead due to the cut simulation can have been obtained using Gurobi. be mapped to finding a weighted minimal cut. We have already introduced a QUBO *Qcut* formulation for weighted minimal cuts in Eq. (8). To incorporate the costs for the component itself also a block matrix. Nevertheless, disconnected solutions and network simulation of the cut and compute the overhead are feasible solutions for distributed parallel simulation. according to Eq. (18), we define the edge weights *wn,m* as Ensuring connectedness is a similar problem to the traveling salesperson problem (TSP), where a satisfactory solution de- *wn,m* = ˆ*cn,m* + 4*N −*1 *,* (22) scribes a *single* tour passing through all the cities that need to *cmax* be visited. A known issue in the Dantzig-Fulkerson-Johnson for the edges in *Ggrid*. We normalize the costs attributed to formulation [49] of the TSP is that solutions often contain the network and the injections by *cmax* to obtain normalized sub-tours, i.e., tours through subsets of cities. An approach flops. for dealing with these disconnected sub-tours is the ”finger-in- *3) Reduce ’idle’ time in network simulation:* For the par- the-dike” method [50], where the problem is initially solved allel network simulation step of the sub-networks, both parts without banning sub-tours, and ad-hoc constraints are intro- should have the same size (=number of nodes) to reduce the duced iteratively to the original formulation to ban them as idle time given by Eq. (19). We thus scale *Qsize* in Eq. (9) as they appear in the sampled solutions. Analogously, here, one could ban disconnected sub-networks as they are sampled to *Qnetwork* = (2*N −*1)2 *Qsize* (23) ensure the connectedness of the sub-networks. *c*2*max* in order to calculate the squared idle time. VI. RESULTS For reproducibility and the fact that most readers will be *D. Partitioning for more than two computational nodes* familiar, we use the IEEE14, 30, 57, 89, 118, 145, 200, Suppose we seek to partition the grid into *P* parts. In that 300 [51] test grids to investigate optimal solutions, resource case, a direct approach is to define integer variables *zn ∈* demands and solution quality on the QPU for *Qpart. {*0*,* 1*, . . . P −*1*}* to encode the partitioning and then extend the QUBO objectives to the more general case. However, encoding *A. Optimal Solutions* integer variables into binary variables significantly increases We use Gurobi to find the optimal solutions of *Qpart.* for the complexity, in particular, the number of qubits. Hence, the test cases with 14, 30 and 57 buses. The MIP gap is set even small problem instances become impossible to embed to 0.01. Obtaining the optimal solutions using a deterministic and solve on near-term hardware. If we seek to distribute the computation to *P* = 2*n* workers, solver is necessary to evaluate the quality of the lowest energy states sampled by the D-Wave annealer. another approach is to partition the (sub-)networks into two The optimal solutions for a small test case demonstrate that parts iteratively. However, an iterative approach does not minimizing *Qpart.* gives a reasonable partition into two sub- guarantee a globally optimal result. The difference between an networks, for example, cf. Fig. 2 for the 30-bus system. The iterative quantum optimization approach and the mixed integer sub-network sizes and the components are balanced and the programming approach introduced above is a research question cut sets are small. Furthermore, changes or modifications in that we intend to investigate in the near future. the network, e.g., moving a generator, can lead to a different partitioning; see the right panel in Fig. 2. Changing the *E. Ensuring Connectedness* position of a generator is clear not a real life scenario but The derived QUBO objective function *Qpart.* does not network reconfigurations are, a different optimal partitioning enforce that each sub-network is connected. In case a sub- exists for each configuration. However, the partitioning itself network is not connected, the costs for the simulation of introduces an overhead: *Qpart.* has to be minimized, and LU the sub-network are overestimated in Eq. (19) because each decomposition has to be performed. Therefore, if a change is connected part can be treated separately since the matrix *YNi* is only persistent for a short time, re-partitioning may increase

7 solution *TTS*(5) for *pS* = 0*.*99 together with the lowest logical qubits/couplers physical qubits/couplers relative error *Lmin* (4) of the sample set. No optimal solution

##### 105

| QPU | Graph |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| QPU | Graph |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

is obtained if *Lmin >* 0. To generate robust statistics, the sample set for a hyperparameter configuration for case 14

##### 104

consists of *Ns* = 104 samples, for case 30 and case 57 of resources *Ns* = 105 samples.

##### 103

Similar to the observations made by Gonzalez Calaza et al. [54], we find that the solution quality is sensitive to the used

##### 102

embedding and the *chain strength CS*, that is, the coupling strength of the physical qubits in a chain, see Fig. 4. For

##### 101

this analysis, we set the annealing time to *TA* = 50*µs*. case14 case30 case57 case89 case118 case145 case200 case300 Furthermore, for better comparison between the test cases, we consider the *relative chain strength* [54] given by *CS RCS* = max(*n,m*)*|*(*Qpart.*)*n,m|.* Fig. 3. Scaling of the number of logical (rectangles) and physical (circles) qubits (blue) and couplers (green) for the QUBO *Qpart.* against the grid size of several IEEE test cases given by the number of buses. The physical For case 14, the fastest *TTS* over all ten embeddings is given resources can be estimated by power laws (dashed lines). The hardware limits for *RCS* between 0*.*1 and 0*.*3; see the right panel in Fig. 4**a**. are drawn as horizontal lines. Each embedding is assigned a color for better comparison. The performance of the embeddings varies significantly, especially the overall computational cost of the simulation. In our future for small *RCS <* 0*.*1. The *TTS* roughly follows a convex work, we plan to investigate whether we can include the function for all embeddings. If the chain strength is too small, overhead of repartitioning in the framework. the chains break regularly and thus do not uniquely represent a logical qubit. On the other hand, if the chain strength is *B. Scaling of Computational Resources* too high, the dynamics during annealing are dominated by the internal dynamics of the chains. By construction, the number of logical variables *Nq,log* is For the best-performing embedding for each *RCS*, the given by the number of buses *N* in the grid. *Qcomponents* (21) optimal solution could be found over almost the whole range and *Qnetwork* (23) are fully connected QUBO objectives, i.e., of chain strengths, except for one outlier, see the left panel each logical qubit has a nonvanishing coupling to every other of Fig. 4**a**. The outlier with *Lmin >* 0 has a lower *TTS*, logical qubit. Thus the full QUBO has *Nc,log* = *N* 2*/*2 logical since the best sampled near-optimal solutions occur more interactions between logical qubits. frequently in the sample set than the optimal solutions for Since complete graphs, and thus fully connected QUBOs, the other embeddings. For case 30, the *TTS* and *Lmin* show can only be directly embedded for *N ≤* 4 on the D- similar behavior for the best embedding and chain strength Wave Advantage System 5.4 (JUPSI) with Pegasus topology combinations. The *TTS* follows a convex function in the *RCS* [52], [53], the actual resources exceed the logical ones as with a minimum between 0*.*02 and 0*.*1. However, the *TTS* we have to find minor embeddings for all test cases. We is at least 10 times slower than for case 14. For case 57, heuristically sample 10 minor embeddings for each test case the current hardware limits are reached, at least as a global to generate some minimal statistics. For the 200 and 300 optimal solver. No optimal solutions could be found for any bus test cases no embedding could be found in a reasonable embedding and chain strength. Additionally (not shown in the time. For the smaller test cases, we find that the number of figure), we sampled the QPU 106 times for the best-performing physical qubits *Nq,phy.* approximately follows a power law combination of *RCS* and embedding for case 57, which did *Nq,phy. ≈*0*.*11*N* 2*.*04 in the number of logical qubits *N*. The not significantly improve the solution quality. power law scales similarly to the number of logical interactions Another hyperparameter that, by definition, affects the *TTS Nc,log*. Likewise, the number of physical couplers *Nc,phy.* is the annealing time *TA*. For the best embedding and chain needed to embed the problem follows a similar power law strength combinations from the previous analysis, the *TTS Nc,phy. ≈*0*.*56*N* 2*.*09 *c,log* in the number of logical interactions, monotonically increases in *TA* for all three cases; see Fig. 4**b**. see Fig. 3. Here, we set *Ns* = 105 for all configurations. The smaller Both power laws estimate resources for other system sizes. problems, which do not seem to need hyperparameter opti- The power laws suggest that the current hardware limits are mization, could profit from using the fast annealing feature, reached at around 200 buses. This is consistent with our which just became available, to achieve an even smaller TTS. findings that no embeddings were found for 200 buses. Other hyperparameters, in particular anneal offsets, have also been found to be important for graph partitioning [55]. *C. Dependence of Solution Quality on Annealing Hyperpa-* It has been demonstrated that tuning anneal offsets on a *rameters* qubit level can prevent chains from freezing out early dur- The quality of the sampled solution on the QPU depends ing the anneal [30] and to prevent perturbative anticrossings strongly on the annealing hyperparameters. We evaluate the [32]. However, since tuning anneal offsets is quite resource- quality of a sample set by considering the time to the best intensive, we leave this for future work.

8

| case14 case30 case57 a lowest rel. error L embedding b lowest rel. error L min min 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0 0.02 0.04 0.06 108 108 106 107 [µs] 106 106 TTS 105 105 104 104 104 0.02 0.1 0.5 0.02 0.1 0.5 1 100 200 rel. chain strength T [µs] A |  |  |  |  |  |  |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Fig. 4. Dependence of solution quality on quantum annealing hyperparameters. a: The left panel shows the dependence of the TTS for pS = 0.99 and Lmin on the RCS for only the best embeddings for cases 14, 30 and 57. For case 14, the right panel shows the variance in TTS between different embeddings (encoded by colors). b: Dependence of the TTS together with L on the annealing time TA for the optimal embedding and chain strength combination found in a. We conclude that the performance of QA depends strongly a case14 case30 case57 on hyperparameters, particularly on the embedding and the chain strength. Furthermore, for quantum annealing, the actual T [µs] time to solution suffers from overheads, i. e. the time needed to 0.4 A L embed the problem and network latency. For a fair comparison 1 error between the performances of quantum annealing on current 50 prototypical hardware with classical deterministic or heuristic relative solvers, the overhead must be included, and the question arises 0.2 whether to compare optimized solvers. A fair comparison would thus reveal current hardware limitations of the D-Wave machine, in particular, the need for minor embeddings [56], 0.0 and is thus not meaningful for the future where some problems might have been overcome, e.g., by adapting the driver to b expand the minimal gap [57]. In this work, we thus omit a benchmarking study and refer to the recent literature: For other highly connected Ising problems, quantum annealing on current D-Wave machines does not provide a speed up or better solution quality [56], [58], [59]. L = 0 L 0.01 L 0.05 ≈ ≈ D. Near Optimal Solutions |  |  | s the dependence of the TTS for pS = 0.99 and Lmin ws the variance in TTS between different embeddings timal embedding and chain strength combination found |  |  |  |
|  | a case14 case30 case57 T [µs] A 0.4 L 1 error 50 relative 0.2 0.0 b L = 0 L 0.01 L 0.05 ≈ ≈ |  | se14 cas |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  | T [µs] A |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | T [µs] A |  |
|  |  |  |  |  | 1 |  |
|  |  |  |  | 50 | 50 |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |
|  |  |  |  |  |  |  |

For larger grids and using non-optimal hyperparameters, we Fig. 5. Assessment of near-optimal solutions. **a**: Comparison of the distri- are likely to only sample near-optimal solutions *L >* 0 on the butions of *L* between different test cases and annealing times *TA*. **b**: Near- optimal partitionings (*L >* 0) for the 14 bus test case in comparison to the QPU. For distributed parallel simulation, all partitionings are, optimal partitioning (*L* = 0). in principle, feasible solutions. If the partitioning is done in the loop, the total runtime is the sum of the overhead due to optimizing the partitioning, i. e. determined by the number of partitionings needs to be investigated in a separate study. The samples *Ns*, the annealing time *TA*, and the runtime of the optimal number of samples will also depend on how often we distributed simulation. Instead of solving the grid partitioning need to (re-)partition the network. QUBO (20) up to optimality, which for large grids becomes Furthermore, the optimal number of samples also depends very hard, sampling near-optimal solutions very fast might be a on the annealing time *TA*. As a preliminary step, we investigate viable near-term application of quantum annealing. The trade- the distribution of the relative error *L* for the best embedding off between shorter overheads due to sampling fewer solution and chain strength combinations found in the previous section candidates and longer simulation times due to sub-optimal for different *TA*, cf. Fig. 5**a**. We find that the mean and the

9 quantiles of the distributions of *L* are, as expected, lower for VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS *TA* = 50*µs* than for *TA* = 1*µs*. Hence, the optimal *TA* for the The paper was written as part of the project ”Quantum- whole loop can not be assessed by just looking at the *TTS* based Energy Grids (QuGrids)”, which is receiving funding for the optimization problem alone. The distributions of *L* also from the programme ”Profilbildung 2022”, an initiative of the reveal that the variance in *L* becomes smaller for larger grids. Ministry of Culture and Science of the State of North Rhine- More surprisingly, the mean of the distributions for case 57 Westphalia. The authors gratefully acknowledge the J¨ulich is lower than for case 30. Hence, we can hope that sampling Supercomputing Centre (https://www*.*fz-juelich*.*de/en/ias/jsc/ partitionings on current (or near-term) QPUs for larger grids systems/supercomputers/apply-for-computing-time/juniq) for will also return near-optimal solutions that are good enough funding this project by providing computing time on the D- to provide simulation speed-ups in competitive time. Wave Advantage™System JUPSI through the J¨ulich UNified Near-optimal solutions might be less intuitive than optimally Infrastructure for Quantum computing (JUNIQ), which has partitioned sub-networks. For case 14, first, the cut becomes received funding from the German Federal Ministry of Edu- larger with increasing *L*; however, the components and sub- cation and Research (BMBF) and the Ministry of Culture and network sizes remain (roughly) balanced, cf. Fig. 5**b**. The Science of the State of North Rhine-Westphalia. The authors increase in cut size leads to disconnected sub-networks. also thank Manuel Dahmen for the fruitful discussions. The sole responsibility for the content of this publication lies with VII. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK the authors. This article presents a novel quantum optimization approach to optimal grid partitioning for diakops-based parallel sim- REFERENCES ulation approaches for power grids. We derived a QUBO formulation by mapping the problem-specific objectives, i. e. [1] W. Jiang, V. Vittal, and G. T. Heydt, “Diakoptic state estimation minimizing the idle times and the overhead due to the cut, to using phasor measurement units,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 1580–1589, 2008. general QUBO objectives for graph partitioning; an approach [2] R. J. S´anchez-Garc´ıa, M. Fennelly, S. Norris, N. Wright, G. Niblo, that might be repeated for other grid partitioning applications J. Brodzki, and J. W. Bialek, “Hierarchical spectral clustering of power [1], [3], [4]. The QUBO scales linearly in the number of grids,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2229– 2237, 2014. buses and is thus efficient for optimal hardware. Moreover, the [3] E. Cotilla-Sanchez, P. D. H. Hines, C. Barrows, S. Blumsack, and optimal solutions to the QUBO formulation provide reasonable M. Patel, “Multi-attribute partitioning of power networks based on partitionings for some small test cases. electrical distance,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 4979–4987, 2013. Furthermore, for current quantum hardware, we have [4] R. J. S´anchez-Garc´ıa, M. Fennelly, S. Norris, N. Wright, G. Niblo, demonstrated that J. Brodzki, and J. W. Bialek, “Hierarchical spectral clustering of power grids,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2229–
1. the partitioning of only small grids can be optimized since

2237, 2014. the QUBOs connectivity requires an embedding on the [5] M. Armstrong, J. Marti, L. Linares, and P. Kundur, “Multilevel MATE QPU graph, for efficient simultaneous solution of control systems and nonlinearities in the OVNI simulator,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 21,
1. the *TTS* and the quality of the solutions depend on the

no. 3, pp. 1250–1259, Aug. 2006. grid size such that for a test case with 57 buses no optimal [6] C. Dufour, J. Mahseredjian, and J. B´elanger, “A combined state-space solution can be found in reasonable time, and nodal method for the simulation of power system transients,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery*, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 928–935, Apr. 2011.
1. the *TTS* and the quality of the solutions are highly sensi-

[7] A. Benigni and A. Monti, “A parallel approach to real-time simulation tive to annealing hyperparameters such as the embedding of power electronics systems,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics*, and the annealing time. vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 5192–5206, Sep. 2015. [8] R. Karp, “Reducibility among combinatorial problems,” in *Complexity* These problems are on such a fundamental level, that bench- *of Computer Computations*, R. Miller and J. Thatcher, Eds. Plenum marking the quantum solver against classical deterministic Press, 1972, pp. 85–103. optimization approaches is, in our view, not meaningful. The [9] M. Kyesswa, A. Murray, P. Schmurr, H. C¸ akmak, U. K¨uhnapfel, and V. Hagenmeyer, “Impact of grid partitioning algorithms on combined current quantum annealers are too noisy and too sensitive to distributed ac optimal power flow and parallel dynamic power grid the choice of hyperparameters. simulation,” *IET Generation, Transmission & Distribution*, vol. 14, In our future research, we plan to investigate whether no. 25, pp. 6133–6141, 2020. [10] Y. Zhou, Z. Tang, N. Nikmehr, P. Babahajiani, F. Feng, T.-C. Wei, sampling near-optimal solution fast might be preferred over H. Zheng, and P. Zhang, “Quantum computing in power systems,” opting for optimal solutions to the QUBO when accounting *IEnergy*, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 170–187, 2022. for the whole partitioning-simulation loop. This is of interest, [11] T. Morstyn and X. Wang, “Opportunities for quantum computing within net-zero power system optimization,” *Joule*, 2024. especially if network topologies change frequently. Whether [12] A. W. Harrow, A. Hassidim, and S. Lloyd, “Quantum algorithm for QA might then offer an advantage over other heuristic ap- linear systems of equations,” *Physical review letters*, vol. 103, no. 15, proaches, c.f. [9], must be studied. p. 150502, 2009. [13] M. Cerezo, A. Arrasmith, R. Babbush, S. C. Benjamin, S. Endo, K. Fujii, We are also planning to investigate whether it is sensible J. R. McClean, K. Mitarai, X. Yuan, L. Cincio *et al.*, “Variational to formulate a more complicated objective function, e.g. to quantum algorithms,” *Nature Reviews Physics*, vol. 3, no. 9, pp. 625– enforce connectivity of the sub-networks or to include modu- 644, 2021. [14] A. M. Childs, R. Kothari, and R. D. Somma, “Quantum algorithm for larity to limit solver iteration, hoping to achieve more optimal systems of linear equations with exponentially improved dependence on overall performance considering the partitioning together with precision,” *SIAM Journal on Computing*, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1920–1950, the parallel simulation. 2017.

10 [15] R. Eskandarpour, P. Gokhale, A. Khodaei, F. T. Chong, A. Passo, and [41] A. Billionnet and B. Jaumard, “A decomposition method for minimizing S. Bahramirad, “Quantum computing for enhancing grid security,” *IEEE* quadratic pseudo-boolean functions,” *Oper. Res. Lett.*, vol. 8, no. 3, p. *Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4135–4137, 2020. 161–163, jun 1989. [16] F. Feng, Y. Zhou, and P. Zhang, “Quantum power flow,” *IEEE Transac-* [42] A. Buluc¸, H. Meyerhenke, I. Safro, P. Sanders, and C. Schulz, *Recent tions on Power Systems*, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 3810–3812, 2021. *Advances in Graph Partitioning*. Cham: Springer International Pub- [17] Y. Zhou, P. Zhang, and F. Feng, “Noisy-intermediate-scale quantum elec- lishing, 2016, pp. 117–158. tromagnetic transients program,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, [43] L. R. Ford and D. R. Fulkerson, “Maximal flow through a network,” vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1558–1571, 2022. *Canadian Journal of Mathematics*, vol. 8, p. 399–404, 1956. [44] I. Das and J. E. Dennis, “A closer look at drawbacks of minimizing [18] A. Ajagekar and F. You, “Quantum computing for energy systems optimization: Challenges and opportunities,” *Energy*, vol. 179, pp. 76– weighted sums of objectives for Pareto set generation in multicriteria optimization problems,” *Structural optimization*, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 63– 89, 2019. [19] F. F. Silva, P. M. Carvalho, L. A. Ferreira, and Y. Omar, “A qubo formu- 69, Aug. 1997. [45] H. Happ, “Diakoptics—The solution of system problems by tearing,” lation for minimum loss network reconfiguration,” *IEEE Transactions on Proceedings of the IEEE*, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 930–940, Jul. 1974. *Power Systems*, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 4559–4571, 2022. [46] J. Shu, W. Xue, and W. Zheng, “A Parallel Transient Stability Simulation [20] T. Morstyn, “Annealing-based quantum computing for combinatorial for Power Systems,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 20, no. 4, optimal power flow,” *IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid*, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1709–1717, Nov. 2005. pp. 1093–1102, 2022. [47] J. Zhang, M. Mittenb¨uhler, and A. Benigni, “Shifted frequency analysis [21] N. Nikmehr, P. Zhang, and M. A. Bragin, “Quantum distributed unit based, faster-than-real-time simulation of power systems on graphics commitment: An application in microgrids,” *IEEE transactions on power* processing unit,” *International Journal of Electrical Power & Energy systems*, vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 3592–3603, 2022. *Systems*, vol. 159, p. 110014, Aug. 2024. [22] F. Feng, P. Zhang, M. A. Bragin, and Y. Zhou, “Novel resolution [48] P. Aristidou, D. Fabozzi, and T. Van Cutsem, “Dynamic simulation of unit commitment problems through quantum surrogate lagrangian of large-scale power systems using a parallel schur-complement-based relaxation,” *IEEE Transactions on Power Systems*, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. decomposition method,” *IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed* 2460–2471, 2022. *Systems*, vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 2561–2570, Oct. 2014. [23] N. G. Paterakis, “Hybrid quantum-classical multi-cut benders approach [49] G. B. Dantzig, D. R. Fulkerson, and S. M. Johnson, *Solution of a* with a power system application,” *Computers & Chemical Engineering*, *Large-Scale Traveling-Salesman Problem*. Santa Monica, CA: RAND vol. 172, p. 108161, 2023. Corporation, 1954. [24] A. Lucas, “Ising formulations of many NP problems,” *Frontiers in* [50] J. A. Monta˜nez-Barrera, P. van den Heuvel, D. Willsch, and *Physics*, vol. 2, 2014. K. Michielsen, “Improving performance in combinatorial optimization [25] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, S. Gutmann, and M. Sipser, “Quantum Compu- problems with inequality constraints: An evaluation of the unbalanced tation by Adiabatic Evolution,” Jan. 2000. penalization method on d-wave advantage,” in *2023 IEEE International* [26] E. Farhi, J. Goldstone, and S. Gutmann, “A quantum approximate *Conference on Quantum Computing and Engineering (QCE)*. IEEE, optimization algorithm,” Nov. 2014. Sep. 2023. [27] D. Wang, K. Zheng, F. Teng, and Q. Chen, “Quantum Annealing With [51] “Example Matpower Cases.” [Online]. Available: https://matpower*.*app/ Integer Slack Variables for Grid Partitioning,” *IEEE Transactions on* manual/matpower/ExamplematpowerCases*.*html *Power Systems*, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 1747–1750, Mar. 2023. [52] J. R. Kelly Boothby, Paul Bunyk and A. Roy, “Next- [28] M. Born and V. Fock, “Beweis des Adiabatensatzes,” *Zeitschrift f¨ur* Generation Topology of D-Wave Quantum Processors,” D- *Physik*, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 165–180, Mar. 1928. Wave Technical Report Series, Tech. Rep.,
1. [On-

[29] T. Albash and D. A. Lidar, “Adiabatic quantum computation,” *Reviews* line]. Available: https://www*.*dwavesys*.*com/media/jwwj5z3z/14-1026a- *of Modern Physics*, vol. 90, no. 1, p. 015002, Jan. 2018. c next-generation-topology-of-dw-quantum-processors*.*pdf [30] E. Andriyash, Z. Bian, F. Chudak, M. Drew-Brook, A. D. [53] C. McGeoch and P. Farr´e, “Advantage Processor Overview,” King, W. G. Macready, and A. Roy, “Boosting Integer D-Wave Technical Report Series, Tech. Rep.,
1. [On-

Factoring Performance via quantum annealing offets,” D-Wave line]. Available: https://www*.*dwavesys*.*com/media/3xvdipcn/14-1058a- Technical Report Series, Tech. Rep., Dec.
1. [Online].

a advantage processor overview*.*pdf Available: https://www*.*dwavesys*.*com/media/l0tjzis2/14-1002a b tr [54] C. D. Gonzalez Calaza, D. Willsch, and K. Michielsen, “Garden op- boosting integer factorization via quantum annealing offsets*.*pdf timization problems for benchmarking quantum annealers,” *Quantum* [31] S. Jansen, M.-B. Ruskai, and R. Seiler, “Bounds for the adiabatic *Information Processing*, vol. 20, no. 9, p. 305, Sep. 2021. approximation with applications to quantum computation,” *Journal of* [55] A. Barbosa, E. Pelofske, G. Hahn, and H. N. Djidjev, “Optimizing *Mathematical Physics*, vol. 48, no. 10, p. 102111, Oct. 2007. embedding-related quantum annealing parameters for reducing hardware [32] T. Lanting, A. D. King, B. Evert, and E. Hoskinson, “Experimental bias,” 2021, pp. 162–173. demonstration of perturbative anticrossing mitigation using nonuniform [56] D. Vert, M. Willsch, B. Yenilen, R. Sirdey, S. Louise, and K. Michielsen, driver Hamiltonians,” *Physical Review A*, vol. 96, no. 4, p. 042322, Oct. “Benchmarking quantum annealing with maximum cardinality matching
1. [33] T. Kadowaki and H. Nishimori, “Quantum annealing in the transverse

problems,” *Frontiers in Computer Science*, vol. 6, p. 1286057, 2024. [57] I. Hen and F. M. Spedalieri, “Quantum Annealing for Constrained Ising model,” *Physical Review E*, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 5355–5363, Nov. Optimization,” *Physical Review Applied*, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 034007, Mar. 1998, publisher: American Physical Society.
1. [58] R. Au-Yeung, N. Chancellor, and P. Halffmann, “Np-hard but no

[34] C. McGeoch and P. Farre, “The D-Wave Advantage System: An Overview,” D-Wave, Tech. Rep.,
1. [Online].

longer hard to solve? using quantum computing to tackle optimization Available: https://www*.*dwavesys*.*com/media/s3qbjp3s/14-1049a-a the problems,” *Frontiers in Quantum Science and Technology*, vol. 2, p. d-wave advantage system an overview*.*pdf 1128576, 2023. [35] C. C. McGeoch and P. Farre, “Milestones on the quantum utility [59] N. Mohseni, P. L. McMahon, and T. Byrnes, “Ising machines as hard- highway,” 2023. ware solvers of combinatorial optimization problems,” *Nature Reviews* [36] “Operation and timing of D-wave quantum computers.” *Physics*, vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 363–379, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://docs*.*dwavesys*.*com/docs/latest/c qpu timing*.*html#qpu-timing-runtime-limits [37] V. Choi, “Minor-embedding in adiabatic quantum computation: I. The parameter setting problem,” *Quantum Information Processing*, vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 193–209, Oct. 2008. [38] J. Cai, W. G. Macready, and A. Roy, “A practical heuristic for finding graph minors,” Jun. 2014. [39] M. E. J. Newman, “Modularity and community structure in networks,” *Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, vol. 103, no. 23, p. 8577–8582, Jun. 2006. [40] Y. Chen, G. Paul, S. Havlin, F. Liljeros, and H. E. Stanley, “Finding a better immunization strategy,” *Phys. Rev. Lett.*, vol. 101, p. 058701, Jul 2008.
